exit right
EXIT RIGHT
HOW TO
SELL YOUR STARTUP,
MAXIMIZE YOUR RETURN,
& BUILD YOUR LEGACY




MERT ISERI & MARK ACHLER
cop y rig h t © 2 02 1 mark a ch l e r & me rt i se ri
All rights reserved.

e x i t rig h t
How to Sell Your Startup, Maximize Your Return, and Build Your Legacy

is bn 978-1-5445-2601-0 Hardcover
      978-1-5445-2599-0 Paperback
      978-1-5445-2600-3 Ebook
To Marcie Achler, the love of my life and
my life-long partner and inspiration.
                                            —MA


To my late grandfathers, Mustak Hilmi Iseri and
Yasa Cetiner, who showed me that to be a great
leader, you need to be a great human being first.
                                            —MHI


And to all entrepreneurs everywhere. To
the dreamers, the risk-takers, and those
with the passion and guts to change
the world. We’re in your corner.
CONTENTS


Foreword by Brad Feld vii
Prologue: The FAIR Framework        xi


PART I: WORKING TOWARD A FAIR ACQUISITION PARTNER 1

1. How Fundraising Impacts the Exit      5
2. Building Trust Takes Time    25
3. When Is the Right Time to
   Begin the Actual Process of a Sale?   43
4. Who Are Key Stakeholders?        59
5. What Does Corporate Development
   Want You to Know?     87


PART 2: NEGOTIATING THE RIGHT EXIT       101

6. Where Do Valuations Come From?        105
7. What Is a Term Sheet?      121
8. How To Maximize Value Throughout the Process         161
9. How To Keep Your Calm as the CEO       179


PART 3: CLOSING AND INTEGRATING FOR THE FUTURE         193

10. How To Get From a Signed Term Sheet to the Close 197
11. How Should the CEO Take Care of the Team?         207
12. What Are the Keys to a Successful Integration?     225


Epilogue: Most of the Journey Is Still Ahead    239
Acknowledgments     247
Endnotes 255
FOREWORD
by Brad Feld




I wrote Venture Deals: Be Smarter than Your Lawyer and Ven-
ture Capitalist in 2011, with the hopes of demystifying what
it takes to raise money for your startup. In the past decade,
entrepreneurship has bloomed, with many more people
starting companies every day. If Venture Deals is about how
to fund the startup journey, Mark and Mert have written the
book about how to conclude it.
  Selling your company is hard work. It’s the part of start-
ing a company that nobody likes to talk about, and yet
every stakeholder wants to see it happen at some point.
This book helps founders figure out how to make it happen
the right way.
    I’ve known Mark for many years as an investor with MATH
Ventures. Mert is a CEO who has been through the trenches
after a tumultuous exit with SwipeSense. They are both
active within the Techstars community as All-Star Mentors
who embody the “Give First” spirit. The lessons they share in
this book have been earned over many years through lots of
challenging decisions.
    I see mistakes in the sale of startups all the time.
Sometimes founders think that their problems will go away
if they can only sell them to someone else. The price may
be less than what the company is truly worth, or buyers
overpay grossly without seeing the real return. Both situa-
tions are bad—bitter founders leave shortly if they believe
their work isn’t recognized, while unhappy buyers develop
an aversion to future M&A, which hurts the ecosystem as a
whole. While randomness and chance play a big role, found-
ers and buyers can greatly improve the odds by playing the
long game.
    Trust is the most important element for exits to happen
and for the integration to prove valuable down the road. This
book takes the mystery out of the process by speaking to
both sides while creating a framework that buyers and sellers
can use to determine if this is the right partnership.
    The FAIR framework (Fit, Alignment, Integration, and
Rationale) describes the four elements that every founder
and buyer should look for as they evaluate opportunities.


x   //   E XIT RIGHT
It’s imperative that founders realize that it is an active part
of their job to ensure all of the stakeholders are in lockstep
via “Exit Talks.” Finally, the detailed discussion of the term
sheet makes this book a worthwhile read for founders who
are looking to level up their negotiation skills.
   I encourage founders to dig deep into the concepts here,
whether you are early and want to build an ecosystem of buy-
ers, or you are a later-stage founder gearing up for an exit.
If you are having disagreements internally with your board
or leadership about strategy or timing, make sure you are
speaking the same language and share the same values on
what you want to see happen in the future.
  As for buyers, this is a great framework to build the case
internally for why an acquisition makes sense. M&A execu-
tives can train their leadership or their product management
teams to understand what makes deals work to avoid prob-
lems down the road.
  Applying these lessons well can mean a difference of mil-
lions when the ink is dry on the closing documents and how
you feel about what is going to happen to your company
down the road. Selling your startup should feel more like see-
ing someone you have been mentoring graduate from college,
filled with pride and optimism for what is to come. This book
will show you how to make that happen.




                                             F OR E WOR D   //   xi
P R O L O G U E


THE FAIR FRAMEWORK




I knew that after signing this piece of paper, my life was going
to change forever.
  The proudest moment of my professional journey was only
a signature away. I was holding a term sheet that described
the sale of our startup. After years of blood, sweat, and tears,
we had successfully arrived at our exit.
   Founders dream about their exits. We all know that you’re
supposed to focus on your customers and your team and not
worry about the exit, but let’s face it, we all do it. Although
both of us sold our first companies decades apart, the feel-
ings we experienced throughout the process were remark-
ably similar.
  An exit means a lot of wonderful things aside from per-
sonal wealth. A successful exit means good things for virtually
every stakeholder you care about in your startup: your team,
your customers, your investors, and your family. All of those
folks believed and invested in the dream: some with their
money, some with their energy, some with both. It feels amaz-
ing to know that their belief in your dream will be rewarded.
   When you sit down to sign the term sheet, an incredible
feeling of accomplishment is shared by everyone involved.
No matter the final price, everyone feels like they’re receiving
a golden ticket to their next big opportunity. For us, the final
sale (Mark with The Whitewater Group in 1991 and Mert
with SwipeSense in 2020) created a sense that we were finally
part of the “Initiated.” We were in an elite group of people
who can call themselves seasoned operators.
      It’s an overwhelming feeling—almost like a supercharged
graduation from your dream school. The best part is that
hopefully this isn’t the end, just another beginning towards
an even bigger dream. Startups are fragile—most of the time
months away from shutting down their doors. The relief of
knowing that your vision will continue for decades is similar
to seeing land for the first time after months at sea (in a boat
that almost sank five times). At least, that’s what we imagine.
  All of this is only a signature away.
   But then, a second wave of feelings washes over you. Doubt
creeps in as you start to consider a new set of individuals


xiv     //   E XIT RIGHT
who now control your destiny. Once the term sheet is signed,
there is no going back. This is the final destination. No matter
what happens in terms of success, the cards are now fully in
the hands of another entity.
   Even worse is when feelings of doubt creep into the final
sale price and you start to question if the buyers are paying
what the company is truly worth. You get that nagging feeling
of leaving money on the table. What if we sold a year later?
What if we sold to another company that can help our mis-
sion more? Are we agreeing to terms that will haunt us down
the road? What the hell does indemnification even mean?
  A signed term sheet doesn’t mean the deal is done—the
stakes are high and the price to pay if things don’t go as
planned is hell. A botched exit means disgruntled investors,
employees who lose focus, and worst of all, customers that
don’t get the attention they deserve.
   How, when, and if you sell your company is the biggest
decision a founder gets to make other than deciding to start
the company. It’s bigger than the key hire, bigger than land-
ing a signature customer, bigger than deciding to work with
a particular investor. It’s the ultimate decision of where you
will call home, hopefully forever.
  We wrote this book to maximize the first feelings and
eliminate the second wave of feelings altogether.
   Exit Right is the book we wish we had read before start-
ing our companies. We have raised over $250 million in


                                            F OR E WOR D   //   xv
financing and have been personally involved in over $1 bil-
lion in exits as founders, executives, board members, and
professional investors.
   Before we start, it’s important to get something out of the
way: there’s a reason not much has been written about how
to sell your company. Today, it is taboo to even talk about the
sale of your company with your board, let alone have long-
term relationships with mergers and acquisitions (M&A)
professionals. Influential investors like Paul Graham go to
exceptional lengths to advise companies to never talk to cor-
porate development. Most of the real wisdom in exits is bur-
ied underneath NDAs, and founders find themselves having
to figure it out as they go through their first exit.
   In a certain sense, Paul is right—if you have built a rocket
ship where sales are going through the roof, investors are
banging down doors to write you checks, and top talent is
fighting to secure a seat—you have nothing to worry about.
In those circumstances, the exit does end up taking care
of itself, given the competitive nature of larger companies
needing to stay relevant. However, this isn’t realistic for most
companies.
   We wrote this book to provide a practical reference book
on how to successfully exit right.
   We want to emphasize this point: we are operators, not
investment bankers. The information and advice in this book
are the result of real lessons learned from real exits. We’re


xvi   //   E XIT RIGHT
giving you the knowledge that founders routinely pay 1–3
percent of their final price to understand.
   We are not brokers. A broker can polish your business to
make sure you are not leaving money on the table for things
that are here today. They review your financials, double-check
your legal agreements, support the negotiation by securing
multiple bids, and more. In other words, a broker can push
you toward the finish line, but you still have to run the mar-
athon beforehand. This book isn’t for the final mile, it’s an
overview of the strategic actions you need to take from start
to finish.
   Our personal experience—further shaped by the research
for this book with over one hundred interviews with serial
entrepreneurs, the biggest buyers from the Valley, and the
best legal advice money can buy—tells us that the makings of
a successful exit start years in advance. A banker can polish
up what’s already there, but we strongly believe that at best,
their work results in an incremental improvement in the
final price and the likelihood of closing. At worst, the banker
does little and their fees simply are a tax that gets deducted
from the final price.
   We want to be clear that there is no advice in this book that
will suddenly make you or your company valuable overnight.
Real value is created over years through trusted relationships
and a strong rationale for long-term value. And although a
successful exit means that the founders get rich, we think of


                                           F OR E WOR D   //   xv ii
being rich as a side effect of the real win: creating a huge mul-
tiplier of impact by joining forces. Our objective is for you
to build the most valuable partnership you can through your
exit. Getting rich is delightful, but secondary.
    This book is meant to be read in the early days of your
company. We believe selling a startup begins with the first
investment you accept. There are small, intentional steps that
founders need to take over the life of the company to execute
a successful sale. At the same time, remember that small mis-
steps early on may set you on the wrong course and create long-
term damage. We want to ensure that doesn’t happen to you.
    To do that, we connected with serial operators with proven
track records to share their stories. They will share stories of
lessons they learned the hard way so that you can understand
what you’re up against. We know that being a founder can be
overwhelmingly lonely throughout all of the challenges. We
want you to know that the great ones also struggled with
what you are going through, and that you are not alone.
    Our goal is for you to exit right and win, both for the short
and long term. Maximize the price for your company while
finding the best long-term partner that positions you and
your company for a legacy you are proud of. Our hope is that
through this collected wisdom you will improve your exit tra-
jectory, and in return, pay it forward to help other founders.
Please reach out to us if you found this book to be helpful with
your startup exit by emailing community@exitrightbook.com.


x v iii   //   E XIT RIGHT
  Let’s now jump right into the framework that we will be
visiting throughout the book—this is the overview of our
findings on what makes a startup exit truly great.


THE FAIR FRAMEWORK

After countless interviews, we identified four common
elements in what makes acquisitions work. These are the
elements that founders and acquirers should focus on to
maximize the value of any transaction.
  We call this the FAIR framework. It’s what everybody
wants, after all—a fair transaction. Founders want to be
treated with respect and expect a return for their hard work.
Acquirers want to avoid companies with skeletons in their
closet or invest dollars in failed initiatives. In short, both
sides want this to work out for the best: a scenario where one
plus one equals one hundred.
  FAIR stands for Fit, Alignment, Integration, and Rationale.
Each element requires time and attention to develop. Here’s
how each impacts the future of your company.


Fit: the connection from parallel company cultures.
  Company culture is a powerful force. Culture is how peo-
ple will act when no one is looking. It specifies the behavior
that is tolerated and what gets promoted. A company is a col-
lection of people and fit simply ensures that the two groups


                                          F OR E WOR D   //   xi x
of people involved in the exit share a common set of values
around their respective businesses.
     A good demonstration of correct fit is the acquisition of
Zappos by Amazon. Zappos was known for their custom-
er-obsessed culture. Employees sent handwritten cards, spent
hours chatting to a single caller, and even boarded flights to
personally deliver packages containing misplaced valuables.1
     Amazon shared their vision for a customer-first approach
to business. They were so well-matched that Amazon’s Jeff
Bezos mentioned he didn’t see it as an acquisition. Rather,
he said: “I personally would prefer the headline ‘Zappos and
Amazon sitting in a tree…’”—framing the transaction as the
beginning of a romantic relationship. He was certainly correct
in his assumption that it was the right choice for both cultures.
     On the other hand, we’ve all seen how a bad fit can eas-
ily lead to disastrous deals. In 1989, Sony paid $4.8 billion
in debt to purchase Columbia Pictures. Sony was a conser-
vative Japanese technology giant, while Columbia Pictures
was a fast-paced, US-based movie studio. Both companies
had completely different operating cultures, and neither side
had a plan for how to make them work together. After five
years, Sony had written off $3.2 billion of its investment in
Columbia Pictures. Not the future any of them wanted.2
     Cultural fit stems from developing long-term relationships.
It is extremely important for founders to begin meeting folks
in their target companies for this reason. There is a world of


xx    //   E XIT RIGHT
difference between an exciting first impression and a rela-
tionship of trust that develops over years. It is easy to feign fit
in the short term, while it is difficult to maintain long-term.


Alignment: there is agreement among the key people
involved in the decision.
   It’s clear that both parties have multiple stakeholders
that need to agree to the transaction. It’s important to note
that alignment isn’t a point in time, but an element of the
transaction that needs to be maintained. Clear communica-
tion, incremental steps to credibility, and most importantly,
mutual trust make up the core components of alignment.
   In the following chapters, we will see a master class in align-
ment in the way Pandora bought Next Big Sound from its CEO,
Alex White. While it was Alex’s first startup, the board and the
shareholders were in lockstep alignment. This was one of the
key ingredients that led to a speedy decision and deal execu-
tion. We will also learn from serial operator Anne Bonaparte
about how she struggled with a rogue board member who
wanted to negotiate behind her back with the acquirer.
   Founders should first ensure that there is alignment inter-
nally, meaning that the four key stakeholders from the start-
up’s perspective are aligned:


   • Co-founders
   • Board


                                              F OR E WOR D   //   xxi
     • Investors
     • Executive leadership


    We recommend that all startups have an annual “Exit Talk”
that acts as a standardized framework to ensure continuous
alignment on exit expectations and timing.
    Once the internal alignment is there, founders benefit
immensely from determining alignment within the acquiring
company in parallel.


Integration: there is a clear plan to integrate all elements of
the business post-acquisition.
    With every deal, the majority of the work that determines
if the merger will be successful happens after the documents
are signed. This means that there needs to be a plan for inte-
grating everything: people, culture, technology, customer
support, parking passes, you name it. Sometimes the task is
mundane, like issuing employee IDs, and sometimes the plan
is to do nothing.
    A successful integration is intentional, with both parties pay-
ing attention to details at every step of the way. It is the found-
ers’ responsibility to make sure there is a clear plan and purpose
around integration, with key metrics to determine success.
    We will outline the key steps in an integration journey
with examples from companies like Slicehost. When they
were acquired by Rackspace, they made sure to communicate


x x ii   //   E XIT RIGHT
the changes to their existing customer base thoughtfully and
proactively along the way so existing customer retention
wouldn’t suffer.
  Integrations are difficult, in part because there is so much
to do tactically all without losing focus on the big picture.
It’s a complicated process that will generate a lot of ques-
tions. The good news is that M&A teams appreciate founders
who ask questions about what success looks like post-inte-
gration; it tells the acquirer that a founder is serious about
creating shared value and getting the deal done. Don’t wait
until the eleventh hour of negotiations to ask questions
around integration. Once you start discussing a term sheet,
it is completely standard to ask questions to clarify plans
around integration.
  A well-crafted integration plan is a critical element of a
smooth transaction. Take the time to build it during the clos-
ing process, and revisit it post-transaction to ensure mutual
accountability.


Rationale: the plan to create new value as a result of the com-
bined capabilities.
  This is the final element that determines the success and
longevity of an acquisition. A strong rationale is the main
ingredient for victory, and a weak one is often the culprit
behind deals that end in defeat. The rationale is the core rea-
son behind the acquisition that all parties will align with. And


                                          F OR E WOR D   //   xxiii
there needs to be a clear business rationale that convincingly
predicts an oversized outcome that would not be possible if
the two companies remained separate.
  The starting point for the rationale is timing: Is now the
right time to make this purchase? Is the buyer better off
by partnering (becoming a customer or a distributor) or
building their own competing product? Timing determines
whether an acquisition happens or not. Further, the acquirer
will need to have absolute trust in the fundamentals of the
business in question.
  Trust is created through a credible team, robust technol-
ogy, and real customers—in other words, you need to cre-
ate a mountain of evidence to breed confidence in the future
plans. Think of this as a basic requirement. In order to even
begin discussing a price, you have to be a trustworthy entity.
  Assuming that the timing is right and your team is credi-
ble, then we can answer these critical questions: Why should
this acquisition happen? What is the mathematical formula
of the future value we will create together?
  No matter how strategic, at some point in the future, the
bill will come due. The acquiring company needs to financially
justify their investment in the future. To do this, they design
a rationale based on the future success that the two compa-
nies will drive together, instead of the current performance
of your company. Remember that you are selling a vision of
the future that happens to be backed up by your credibility.


xxiv   //   E XIT RIGHT
Founders need to deeply understand the acquirer’s business
to articulate a defensible rationale.
   Facebook knocked this out of the park with its acquisition
of Instagram. It was clear that the Facebook team was falling
behind on mobile user growth. The tech giant lacked the tech-
nology talent and the infrastructure to translate its web-based
technology to the growing mobile market. Instagram was
clearly ahead, and the rates of growth indicated that each pass-
ing day made the budding photo-sharing app more valuable.
  The Instagram acquisition is a longer story that we will
visit during Part 2, but suffice to say Mark Zuckerberg was
initially considered a fool for paying close to $1 billion for
the photo-sharing app. Nearly a decade later, Facebook makes
over $20 billion in ad revenue per year from Instagram, nearly
a fifth of all Facebook revenues.
   While Instagram is the crown jewel of Facebook’s acqui-
sition portfolio, not every megamerger means a successful
future. One of the most visible examples of bad rationale hap-
pened in the largest acquisition in tech history—when Time
Warner and AOL joined forces. While it made for a good head-
line, most of the operators working on the deal could not artic-
ulate why it made sense for the two companies to join forces.
  The rationale is the most critical component of a transac-
tion. Know that as the world changes, so will the rationale. It
is critical to build the alignment around the shared objective;
this will be the fundamental driver of the transaction.
  With a comprehensive understanding of the FAIR frame-
work, plus lessons from those who have successfully (and not
so successfully) navigated an exit before you, you are going to
make the right exit for you and your company. You’ll be able
to recognize the elements of FAIR everywhere and use them
to create the best future for yourself, your investors, your
board, and your employees. Let’s begin with the first part of
our journey—everything that happens before the company
decides to pursue an acquisition.
P A R T        I




WORKING TOWARD
A FAIR ACQUISITION
PARTNER

Justin Kan, a successful founder with multiple exits and
a partner at YC, sold his first startup, Kiko, on eBay in a
process that took less than a week. The final price was
$258,100. It was an insanely efficient process in terms
of simplicity, but one that failed miserably. He never
received the payment and, ultimately, had to shut down
his startup.
   He later went on to start justin.tv, which became
Twitch, the pioneer streaming platform. His exit to
    Amazon took much longer than a week, but the final
    price was much better: $1 billion.
         Twitch’s success steadily increased after the sale in
    2014. It went on to overtake Microsoft’s own Mixer and
    delivered more than $2 billion in revenue in 2020. Twitch
    was a story of how FAIR elements create massive value
    in the long run. It’s not simply because FAIR deals make
    more money for the founder at the sale (which they
    do), but they ensure long-term growth and success for
    everyone as the company becomes even more success-
    ful under the parent organization.
         How did Justin Kan and Twitch manage to create
    something so valuable within a larger company? We
    have to begin by looking many years before the trans-
    action took place. The most successful startup exits
    are years in the making. An outsized return is only pos-
    sible by developing foundational trust in the founders,
    whether through proven reputation or trusted relation-
    ships. Both are impossible to generate overnight.
         As such, the first part of our journey will focus on that
    preparation effort—how to sell your company without
    taking your hands off the wheel.
         You might be thinking: “But wait! All of my inves-
    tors and mentors told me to never worry about the exit.
    Instead, I should focus on building a great business.”
    Your mentors are right, you have to ace the fundamentals



2   //   E XIT RIGHT
with your company performance. But you can certainly
focus on more than one thing over the next few years.
   Somehow, founders accepted that they should spend
three to six months every year and a half to fundraise,
but not even three to six days to work on their eventual
acquisition. This is foolish. If you can carve out that time
to fundraise, you also have to allocate a smaller amount
of time to slowly put together the pieces for your exit.
The following chapters will show you how to do that
without ever explicitly saying your company is for sale.
   You have to get the timing right. Too late, and you lose
out on your momentum and face investor fatigue; too
early, and you leave money on the table and risk losing
investor confidence in your ambition. We will carefully
describe the four elements of getting the timing right,
and what to do before that moment arrives.
   A successful exit is about long-term trust, and the key
to generating that is empathy. This begins with a deep
inspection of your key stakeholders and the folks on the
buyer side. Beyond learning their job titles, we will show
you how to understand their incentives and make those
work for you.




      WOR K ING T OWAR D A FAIR A CQUISI T ION PAR T NER   //   3
C H A P T E R       1


HOW FUNDRAISING
IMPACTS THE EXIT




M
        ost of us know Travis Kalanick from his
        meteoric rise as the CEO of Uber, and his ultimate fall
        from grace. What most don’t talk about is his obses-
        sive focus on controlling his own destiny. He had a
hard-earned fear of fundraising from his first two startup
experiences, and it drove all of his decisions at Uber as well.
  Travis began his entrepreneurial journey right before the
dot-com boom, with Scour.net. It was an early file-sharing
company, a predecessor to Napster. While things got off to a
good start, he started having huge issues with Michael Ovitz,
his biggest investor. The feared Hollywood executive hung
him out to dry when Scour was ultimately sued for $250 bil-
lion by entertainment companies for illegal content. Travis
was forced to sell, and his investors walked away with all of
the proceeds.
    It was a devastating outcome that left a deep scar, and
he vowed to do things differently next time. He purpose-
fully structured his next company, Red Swoosh, so that he
would have control over the exit, and in doing so managed
to walk away with a cool $2 million from the sale to Akamai
Technologies.
    At Uber, things were no different. He and his partner, Emil
Michael, played the game perfectly, wooing investors with
their impressive traction. Uber went on to raise billions in
capital, with a dual stock structure. Pioneered at companies
like Facebook and Google, this structure allows common
stockholders to have disproportionate voting power in the
company. As long as Travis kept his co-founders close, he
could do whatever he wanted with more or less impunity.
While Uber was able to part ways with him in the end, he
walked away with billions.
    While he left Uber with billions, Travis paid a heavy price
in the decade before starting the company by not carefully
managing his cap table. These are costly lessons to learn, and
every founder should reflect on their own journey before
committing to a decision to fundraise. Before Travis even
knew what Uber would be, he solidified his approach to


6   //   E XIT RIGHT
fundraising. He understood the value of a well-established
plan as he moved forward in his new company. You also
need this same understanding before you even think about
fundraising, let alone an exit plan. Without it, you’ll miss the
opportunity to exit the right way, on your terms.
   Selling shares in your startup means giving away control
of your own destiny. You might still be the CEO, but big
decisions like selling your company are now a decision of
consensus between you, the board, and your shareholders.
This is a bitter pill to swallow, but it is important to begin
our conversation with this hard truth: you are no longer
fully in charge.
   Every decision you make at the beginning will have an
impact at the end, including who you have to listen to when
it’s time to make big decisions and how the proceeds will ulti-
mately be split. Funding terms you agree to will dictate the
equity splits during the exit. Depending on how much, under
what terms, and from whom you raise capital can mean the
difference between a fair exit and one that you feel unhappy
about. It could make millions of dollars’ worth of difference
to your bank account in the end.
   We have both learned these lessons personally through
failed startups and bitter losses. Each acquisition is unique,
but the mistakes we see entrepreneurs repeating are consis-
tent. The lessons around cap table management point to a
simple truth—this will take longer than you expected. Forget


                    HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   7
the mystery phone call you might get one day with someone
interested in acquiring you. That happens to some, but it
likely won’t happen to you. Most acquisitions are priced well
under $100 million, and they are the result of a long-term
process built on trust.
    Every dollar you take, and every share you give away, mat-
ters. The people whom you decide to take on as investors and
shareholders matter.
    At this point you need to consider how the equity owner-
ship of your company is distributed. How much do you own,
who else is on the cap table, and under what terms? This
information should determine the way you move forward in
your fundraising efforts with the end exit in mind.
    To help get you started on the right path and ensure that
you do not make an error early on that causes major ramifi-
cations in the future, consider the following six principles for
fundraising early on in your journey.


KNOW THYSELF: WHAT KIND OF
BUSINESS DO YOU WANT TO BUILD

Let’s begin with the difference between a venture-back-
able business and a lifestyle business. A venture-backable
business is a company whose business model and technol-
ogy have the potential to generate significantly outsized
returns—often one hundred times or more of the valuation


8   //   E XIT RIGHT
of initial investment—fetching valuations above hundreds
of millions of dollars.
   In contrast, a lifestyle business is a company whose busi-
ness may be successful, even immensely profitable, but lacks
the opportunity to scale above a certain threshold. This may
be due to limits in the overall size of the market, growth
obstacles around staff and automated systems, or lack of fly-
wheel network effects.
   Many first-time entrepreneurs are blind to the import-
ant distinctions between these two types of businesses.
Just because an entrepreneur is passionate about a given
market, idea, or product does not mean it will automati-
cally be venture-backable. There are plenty of examples of
companies who need capital to operate, but don’t find ven-
ture investors to be a good fit for their long-term goals. No
matter what you decide, you must protect your shares and
treat them like the millions of dollars they will be worth in
the future.
  Above all, make sure that whether you’re a venture-back-
able or lifestyle business, you’re staying true to your vision,
goals, and mission. Do not try to contort yourself or your
company to be palatable for investors. The price of a disingen-
uous investor relationship is much too steep at the time of
exit. You will end up with a company that is unrecognizable
to you and a group of people in charge that you do not trust.




                    HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   9
A CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP IS A CHANGE IN
EXPECTATIONS FOR TIMING OF A LIQUIDITY EVENT

Much of the startup media ecosystem is filled with head-
lines covering funding rounds and valuations. While the big
numbers are flashy and intriguing, there is much more to
fundraising than simply adding capital. It also adjusts the
timeline of your future exit. The truth is if you raise money,
you’re shifting the ownership structure of your business.
     Many of the seed stage fundraising terms include pre-
ferred shareholders with liquidation preferences. These are
the legal rights that determine how the payout from the sale
will be distributed. With liquidation preferences, investors
can take their money out first, and then the remaining funds
are left for distribution.
     In addition, it is common to see board structures that
favor shareholders instead of the co-founding team. This
means that investors can decide to replace you, the CEO, if
you disagree with their decision to sell. Conversely, if you are
too tired to go on, but the company is on a growth path, the
board and shareholders can similarly fire the CEO for some-
one with higher ambitions for their capital.
     This change in ownership comes with an implicit agree-
ment and timeline for a liquidity event. Your new co-owner
is going to want to come away with a return multiple on that
investment on their time horizon, not yours.


10    //   E XIT RIGHT
  This is not inherently a bad thing. In fact, the timeline can
work to motivate teams to push towards their goals in effi-
cient and effective ways. However, it is something you need to
consider at the very beginning of your entrepreneurial jour-
ney. You don’t want to be a couple of fundraising rounds into
your journey before you understand what your timeline to
sale is. You need a plan up front so that you can make inten-
tional decisions that are right for you as soon as possible.


UNDERSTAND HOW MUCH COMMON SHARES
ARE WORTH AT WHAT EXIT PRICE

We’ve been in your shoes and we interact with entrepreneurs
every single day. And the truth is that most entrepreneurs
are optimizing across the wrong vectors when it comes to
fundraising.
   Too many founders today are optimizing for the high-
est valuation, the most amount of money, or the flashiest
VC brand to add to their cap table while ignoring the most
important key issue: how much are common shares worth
when it’s time to sell?
   By simply prioritizing the highest valuation or the largest
amount of funding that can possibly be secured, founders put
themselves at risk of erasing any meaningful returns they might
receive as a result of the sale. Before you sign a term sheet, you
have to know: what will the common shares be worth?


                   HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   11
     Most founders do not think seriously about the full picture
of how those terms will dictate the ways the business will run
in the following years, or what those terms will mean for an
eventual exit. But the amount of money you raise, the source of
that capital, and the valuation at which the funding is secured
determine the waterfall: the distribution of the proceeds.
     Most entrepreneurs are familiar with the VC model. VCs
will make ten bets in the hope that one or two will be “home
runs” and return ten times the value of the investment. To
further remove risks from their investments, many carve out
preferred shares that pay back before common stock, occa-
sionally with a multiple attached to the preference. In practi-
cal terms, an investor might be guaranteed a 3x return before
any of the proceeds are available for the rest of the sharehold-
ers, including you and your team. If the price of the exit is
only 2x what they paid for the company and the investor was
guaranteed 3x, then all of the proceeds will go to the investors.
     In the simplest terms, you are giving up a portion of
the equity ownership in your company for money, but that
money can come at a great price. It comes with financial and
legal obligations that tie your fate, and that of your company,
to a third-party investor. You need to be sure that the money
you are “buying” will be worth it—and that there will be
something left over for you and your employees at the end.
A well-structured fundraise and sensible valuations mean
that you will walk away rich when the dust settles. A rushed


12    //   E XIT RIGHT
process and tough terms on the exit in exchange for a flashy
valuation could mean that you walk away with nothing.
  We understand the temptation. It feels great to read a
TechCrunch article that features your company’s accomplish-
ments, including funding from a top venture fund. The same
teams that once backed giants like Google, Facebook, and
Amazon are now betting on your success. This is a great feel-
ing, but one that can lead founders to lose sight of what they
are giving up. Consider yourself in the shoes of a CEO who is
looking at three term sheets for her upcoming round:


  1. Brand-name VC firm offered a high valuation with an
       associate in a board observer role.
  2. Midsize venture fund at a lower valuation who would
       dedicate personal time and with a valuable network.
  3. Two older, very experienced angel operators with an
       even lower valuation who would dedicate one day per
       week in service of the company.


  These are vastly different offers, and the unique benefits
and downsides of each structure are much more important
than the economics.
  The first scenario is best for founders who are seasoned,
understand the market they are going after, and don’t need
much help or guidance from their shareholders. An associ-
ate in that fund is likely to get experience as an observer and


                   HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   13
junior voice on the board, and experienced founders know
how to manage the rest of their boards. Practically speaking, a
higher valuation coupled with passive investors is not always
a bad combination. As long as you are confident that there is a
direct path to victory, this is a straightforward choice to make.
     The second scenario is for founders who will need more
capital down the road. A seasoned VC who has been in oper-
ator roles will be an invaluable member of the board and can
offer practical advice on most issues surrounding the CEO.
Mark is one of those VCs, someone who holds you to high
standards and outcomes, while approaching issues with
empathy and a give-first mentality.
     Additionally, access to the network a VC like this has will
make the rest of the fundraising process much more efficient.
A warm introduction from someone who has made money for
them in the past does wonders for making a successful first
conversation. You should use it to your advantage.
     The slight increase in the equity you give away now will
return itself many times over in future rounds. This was the
situation for Cameo and its Chicago-based founder, Steven
Galanis. Ezra Galston from Chicago Ventures led his seed
round with a modest $3.2 million check. He was shortly fol-
lowed by Pritzker Group Venture Capital with a $12.5 million
investment. Nine months later, Kleiner Perkins led the Series
B with a $50 million check at a reported $300 million in valua-
tion. None of that would be possible without Ezra’s first check.


14    //   E XIT RIGHT
  The final scenario is the most complicated one, and it really
depends on a single factor: how good are the operators join-
ing the management team for one day per week? The right
mentor—one who is willing to take you under their wing and
give you real support—will accelerate your development as a
CEO. The return on this can’t be measured with the percent-
age of the company you are giving up.
   It is extremely difficult to determine if the partners in front
of you can give you the kind of guidance you need, but that is
where their track record working with founders comes in. Do
your research and never make a decision that doesn’t align with
what your core values and motivations are. For a first-time
founder, this may be a particularly important choice to con-
sider. Moreover, if the company is poised for profitability and
you intend to grow with your own profits, having a steady hand
at the helm is more critical than your ability to raise capital.
  A seasoned VC can teach you how to fundraise. A seasoned
operator will teach you how to run a company with solid funda-
mentals. Additional capital can mask issues, and no junior MBA
can give you a parallel experience to learning from the best.


YOU SHOULD CONDUCT DUE DILIGENCE ON YOUR INVESTORS

Fundraising feels like an accomplishment. And it certainly is.
You have managed to successfully sell shares in your compa-
ny—a great vote of confidence in your future success.


                    HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   15
     When it is all said and done, it feels great to see the wires
come in. The horizon is bright, and the resource cabinet is
stocked for the adventures ahead.
     But don’t let the promise of a champagne toast over-
shadow the responsibility of the founders to do their home-
work. Both the founders and investors need to ensure they
are making the right decision. Investors are professionals at
this—they invest capital for a living and know the red flags to
look out for. Just like when your company is being acquired,
the odds are stacked against you.
     Your job is to suss out the red flags of your potential inves-
tors. Treat it like a true partnership. Remember you are hir-
ing them to provide capital for your future. Not doing real,
substantive due diligence can be disastrous, even for the
most experienced operators.
     Gregg Kaplan is a well-known Chicago area entrepreneur
who started Redbox out of the innovation department of
McDonalds and grew it to a more than $2 billion annual sales
company in just seven years. He then founded Swing King,
Modjule, and became an operating partner at Pritzker Group
Venture Capital. He has been through the trenches and has
learned the lessons of picking the wrong partners over the years.
     He advised that above and beyond the percentage of the
company you are giving away, you first need to define the rela-
tionship between the two parties. “There are a lot of investors
who are looking to get the best deal for themselves, not for all


16    //   E XIT RIGHT
parties involved. It’s incredibly hard to discern the real char-
acter of someone before the critical moment of a transaction,”
he said. To Gregg, the real character of your future partner
shows up in their behavior during the raise, and if left unad-
dressed, comes back to haunt you during the exit.
   For him, this means only doing business with known
quantities—a luxury that seasoned operators may have, but
is not a realistic standard for most founders. So, what can
founders do to mitigate their risk instead of simply hoping
their investors turn out to be nice guys?
   Taking someone’s money should be treated like a job inter-
view. You are interviewing them to see if you want to take
their money. Another way to think about it is that you are
buying their investment, and you need to read the fine print.
   Request lots of information. Ask for their full list of CEOs
and phone numbers. Ask what their returns are like. Reach
out to their co-investors who serve on mutual boards. Talk to
the companies that have exited in their portfolio. Don’t just
talk to the flashy exits, find the founders who barely returned
1–2x paid-in capital.
   Any hesitancy on the part of an investor to freely provide
this information once requested is a red flag. If they have
good outcomes and good relationships with their portfolio
founders, it should be no problem to provide it.
   As an active investor over decades, Mark has created his
own no-fly list for investors he stays away from working with.


                   HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   17
These are individuals who spur infighting among sharehold-
ers, make eleventh-hour demands, or immediately resort
to legal action every time they don’t get their way. In other
words, folks who view the world as a zero-sum game. Folks
who believe “You have to lose in order for me to win.”
     Those individuals on the no-fly list generally assume that
they are doing right by their investors (the limited partners
of their funds). In reality, they are winning a few short- term
points while losing out on their reputation. If you are known
to be a difficult entity to work with, you will be left out of
future term sheets.
     Look, we get it; sometimes your back is up against the wall
and you might not have an alternative path to raising capi-
tal. But nothing sucks the joy out of life like a bad partner. A
slight bank account may be bad; we guarantee you that hav-
ing the wrong partner will eventually be worse.


 EVERY SHARE COUNTS, SO AVOID
“DEAD EQUITY” ON THE CAP TABLE

At the outset, cap table management is one of the most
important decisions you have to make. Aside from selling
shares to raise funds, there are other ways founders give up
equity in their companies.
     Whom you decide to give shares to is one of the most con-
sequential matters in this process. How much are you going to


18    //   E XIT RIGHT
give to co-founders? How much do you set aside for employee
options? Who will serve on your board, at what price?
   It’s imperative to limit the amount of “dead equity” you
have on your books. Dead equity is the number of shares
given away to people who are not actively building the value
of your company. Be stingy with it, because every share mat-
ters in the end. The best operators ensure that every share of
equity goes to people who are making that success possible.
  But too often, founders give away too much stock up front.
Whether to early partners, employees, or advisors, let’s take
a closer look at what some mistakes might look like.


A founder who is no longer there. Imagine that three busi-
ness school classmates decide to start a business. They each
work equally to get it off the ground and split the company
ownership evenly in thirds. Then, two of the three decide
they want to stick with it full-time. The third needs one of
those pesky “real jobs.”
  Because of the initial company structure, and assuming
it hasn’t changed, that third individual will continue to own
a third of the company even without their full commitment
and input. This will stick out like a sore thumb down the
road. They might have blocking rights to a sale, and they will
do exactly that if they have a grudge against the team that
stayed behind. Typically, co-founder dramas end ugly, no
matter who is right.


                   HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   19
     Think about what it would feel like to lose out on a
life-changing transaction because someone had an axe to
grind. That’s why terms like stock vesting schedules and cliffs
are crucial. Don’t just give away big chunks of the company
without solidifying the terms required to vest the stock.
     The best way to deal with this problem is to avoid having
it in the first place—as soon as you have an idea, get a lawyer
to spend an hour with you on a very straightforward vest-
ing schedule. A one-year cliff and four-year vesting is mar-
ket standard—it means that employees must stay with the
company for a full year to claim 25 percent of their equity. If
they meet that threshold, the rest will start accruing monthly
until they accrue all their equity in a total of four years.


An early “advisor” who no longer adds value. Advisors who
demand unconscionable amounts of equity only to vanish
without delivering real value are another common culprit
of dead equity. These types of startup hangers-on often give
very tempting pitches and lead founders to believe they have
the answer to every problem, or the keys to early sales growth.
     We have all been intoxicated with the promises of what an
amazing advisor can do to our company. Unfortunately, more
often than not, these are dreams, not reality. Be extremely
wary of any advisor who asks for a chunk of equity up front
before they’ve proven the value they are going to add. If
someone has made ten warm introductions that led to new


20    //   E XIT RIGHT
sales, this dynamic is, of course, entirely different. Raise your
bar before you commit to an advisor, especially with equity.


THE AMOUNT OF THE RAISE, SOURCE OF CAPITAL,
AND THE VALUATION/TERMS DETERMINE THE
WATERFALL: THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE PROCEEDS

Hopefully, you’ve taken all of this into consideration, and
found wonderful partners to grow your business with. Don’t
worry, there are multiple paths for you and your team to have
a great outcome.
   Let’s evaluate the most important document: the waterfall.
The spreadsheet that will change your life, where your sweat
and equity transform into capital. The waterfall is sometimes
referred to as the preference stack, the order in which share-
holders receive their money. This is an even bigger deal if the
final price of the company doesn’t meet valuation targets.
   In order to understand this, there are three examples on
the following page of how the chips would fall in relatively
similar transactions.
  The first scenario is the simplest. You have used your own
source of capital or, even better, the revenues from your
customers to grow your business. This means that you are
in total control of the time and distribution; you get to call
the shots. The final price of $30 million is completely yours,
minus the share to Uncle Sam.


                   HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   21
Company sells for $30,000,000

                Scenario 1    Scenario 2    Scenario 3    Scenario 4

Capital
Raised          –             $2,000,000    $10,000,000   $10,000,000

                                                          2x
Preference                    1x            1x            participating

Pre-Money
Valuation                     $8,000,000    $15,000,000   $15,000,000

Post-Money
Valuation                     $10,000,000   $25,000,000   $25,000,000

Entrep. %       100%          80%           60%           60%

Investor %                    20%           40%           40%

Preference                                                $20,000,000

Entrep. $       $30,000,000   $24,000,000   $18,000,000   $6,000,000

Investor $                    $6,000,000    $12,000,000   $24,000,000



     In the second scenario, the company has sold one-fifth of
their company, and the resulting exit meant that the entre-
preneur made a cool $24 million in the exit before tax. This is
directly proportional and would be considered a great outcome.
     The third scenario had more capital invested, at a higher
valuation! The headline version of this exit would certainly
read better, but the bill will come due for the founder in the
end. The larger sale of the shares means that the founder is
down to $18 million. Still, not bad.


22    //    E XIT RIGHT
   However, the final scenario is where the preference stack
rears its ugly head. Imagine the same dollars in Scenario 3,
but with the simple addition of a 2x preference stack with
participating preferred shares. (This wouldn’t even make it
to the TechCrunch article; the hyped-up valuation reads the
same!) In the waterfall, this means the investors can take out
their investment at a 2x return first, prior to the proceeds to
all of the shareholders. A guaranteed $20 million in return,
and the remaining funds get divided up according to share-
holder percentages. Suddenly, the investors have turned the
tides—founders are only walking away with $6 million. This
is a material difference and should be a cautionary tale to pay
really close attention to all of the terms you are signing up for
during fundraising.
   While raising capital is an important factor, selling your
company is an awesome thing.
   If you make the right calls, you can walk away with a
life-changing sum of money as a result of all of this plan-
ning and intentional fundraising and decision-making. It is
extremely exciting to see the dream you poured years of your
life into reach even bigger heights.
  As long as founders pay close attention to their part-
nerships, develop sound operating principles, and prepare
themselves for a FAIR exit, things will work out. In the end,
all shareholders, including both common and preferred
shareholders, want the highest return possible. While the


                   HOW FUNDR AISING IMPA C T S T HE E XI T   //   23
investment terms dictate the distribution, whether the
transaction happens or not depends on an entirely differ-
ent currency: trust. In the next chapter, we will dig into how
trust factors into the sale of your company.




24   //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R     2


BUILDING TRUST
TAKES TIME




T
     hink about the list of people you trust the
     most. These can be family members, romantic partners,
     and hopefully, your close business relationships. The
     common thread with those people should be evident:


  1. Trust took a long time to form with those people.
  2. You have overcome challenges together, not just
      celebrated good times.
  3. You have grown to respect that individual’s judgment
      in key decisions.
     Now, put yourself in the shoes of an acquiring company.
These same themes would show up with the companies you
were considering as potential partners. For most startups,
the values of the organization reflect the values of the CEO,
and the trust you build around yourself as the leader will
reflect the value for the rest of the organization.
     We know that selling your company begins with the deci-
sions made during fundraising. That defines the loose archi-
tecture around value and timing. However, the fuel that
powers a FAIR exit is trust between leaders. It is the single
biggest asset that you can have as a CEO. There is a tremen-
dous amount of goodwill required for a transaction to hap-
pen, and a dearth of trust will make the sale dead on arrival.
The good news is you can start building this trust with every-
one you know immediately.
     Before we dive into how to build the necessary trust and
relationships, let’s pause to clarify a point. What makes an
exit possible is a sound business with great fundamentals.
You need to exceed tremendous expectations and prove the
value of your technology, product, customer base—whatever
it is that makes your company unique. Without building and
proving significant market value, you can’t expect to see an
offer at all, much less a FAIR one.
     One of the common pieces of pushback we received from
our colleagues in writing this book was one of protest: “Just
hunker down and build a great business; a buyer will show


26    //   E XIT RIGHT
up!” To that we say “Yes, and…” Of course you have to hun-
ker down and build a great business, but you also need to be
aware about how your early decisions and ability to establish
relationships will ultimately determine your outcomes.
   What we are describing here is an efficient way to run a
silent process in the background, to build layers of trust and
authentic relationships over time, so that you are “selling”
your company well in advance of when the actual deal process
begins. The advice in this chapter about building and banking
trust is intended to foster the dynamics that lead to success-
ful, well-valued sales with as little friction as possible. After all,
it is much easier to build a huge castle on a solid foundation.
   A successful exit doesn’t happen by accident. You want
your company to be valued on what it can do with the parent
company. The only way that will happen is if you have a deep
understanding of what the companies can accomplish under
one umbrella.


STARTUPS NEED TO BANK A LOT OF TRUST
BEFORE A SUCCESSFUL TRANSACTION

Exits are hard, primarily for three reasons:


There is too much to do. There are lots of variables to focus
on. From simple relationship building to complicated due
diligence, getting acquired takes a lot of effort. Founders


                              BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   27
are stuck between focusing on getting the exit right and
operating their companies smoothly so they continue to hit
their targets.
     Focus is extremely important when time is limited, and a
startup can easily lose it with the shiny allure of a successful
payout. This leads to competing objectives: if the acquiring
company really cares about the sales performance but does
not care about product development, the company might
focus on what matters to the buyer instead of the organiza-
tion, or the customer.
     In addition, if the deal falls apart—which happens more
often than successful transactions do—this can be a massive
time sink for the organization as a whole. Those lost months
do not come back. And at that point you’re facing sinking
morale from a team stung by defeat.
     Right before your exit is not the time to add a complex
task to your to-do list. Even if it were possible to establish
genuine trust, there wouldn’t be enough time to juggle that
along with all your other responsibilities. That’s why building
trust is a long-term goal you need at the very beginning.


There are too many stakeholders. CEOs need to align (and
then keep aligning) a large group of competing stakeholders
while negotiating an exit. You can expect to manage every-
one from your internal investor base, the board of direc-
tors, and leadership team, to external stakeholders like legal


28    //   E XIT RIGHT
teams, bankers, and executives who are both working for and
against your acquisition. Each individual stakeholder creates
a new relationship of trust you need to build and maintain.
  As such, spreading these responsibilities over time will
make it easier for you to focus on the top priorities of each
stakeholder. You won’t be scrambling to understand each per-
son’s goals while trying to execute a sale. You’ll already have
a clear picture based on numerous conversations over time.


There is too much on the line. Exits are life-changing. A
transaction can lead to generational wealth, a healthier life-
style, a wider network of mentors for your future, and a mis-
sion far greater than what the startup could accomplish on
its own. Because so much is on the line, it can be increasingly
difficult to operate under pressure.
  The price of a mistake during the regular course of a startup
can be high, but it is rarely critical. Companies typically do
not go out of business because of one blunder. However, in
an M&A process, deals can fall apart immediately after one
wrong phone call. One meeting that goes awry. One diligence
item that does not add up. Without built-in trust, there is no
way to recover from an inevitable challenging moment.
   It takes nerves of steel to maintain a steady hand through-
out all of this. Trust is the solution; it eases your stress and
the buyer’s checkbook.




                           BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   29
EVALUATING TRUST WITH DIFFERENT STAKEHOLDERS:
BOARD, INVESTORS, INTERNAL LEADERSHIP TEAM

Key leadership needs to remain focused on execution during
the sale.
     When the moment to sell arrives, you will need key
employees on your side. They will need to trust you that you
have their back—that they will be taken care of with compen-
sation or through a new role in their new home.
     We will dig into the details of the need for transparency
about the upcoming transaction in later chapters, but the
broader point is simple: if you have been a tyrant, an abusive
leader who took advantage of your team to get here, the bill
will come due.
     You need extreme alignment and loyalty among your team
as you present your company to an acquirer. If there is mutiny
on board, the turmoil will show up as bad performance. No
buyer wants to inherit a crisis, and if the team doesn’t trust
you are doing right by them, they won’t stand by you.


Board of Directors build credibility and trust in the judg-
ment of the CEO.
     Laying the groundwork for a positive transaction experi-
ence starts with cultivating trust with your board. Developing
trust means developing relationships. And developing rela-
tionships means focusing on communication.


30    //   E XIT RIGHT
   If your board members trust you, they trust your judg-
ment. With that trust, they will likely embrace your reason-
ing and your decision to sell with enthusiasm.
   Don’t simply rely on quarterly meetings and long decks
to create trust. Commit to what you can deliver and show
up with results. Especially during the sale process, make sure
you are scheduling regular one-on-one check-ins with each
individual. Your board needs to know what’s going on, where
you are experiencing challenges, and what your plans are to
face them. Board alignment is your responsibility; remem-
ber that the sale is only in consideration because the board
decided to do so.
  Alex White, the Founder and CEO of Next Big Sound, sold
his company to Pandora in 2015. It was his first transaction.
Alex did a lot of things right, but he also made some mistakes
because he was a first-time founder. One of the benefits of col-
lecting industry wisdom in a book like this is that now a bigger
audience can learn from the mistakes that others have made.
   One of the things Alex got right was the trust he was able
to secure from his board. Brad Navin was the independent
board member of Next Big Sound and the CEO of the Orchard,
a music label owned by Sony. A great operator in his own right,
Brad led the acquisition of the Orchard to Sony. Afterwards,
as one of the key leaders at the mega-label, he led dozens
of acquisitions. He recalled one of the things that stood out
to him was Alex’s very careful cultivation of meaningful


                           BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   31
relationships with each individual board member. “He did all
of the right things with the board, and when it came time to
ask us for the vote, there was no question in anyone’s mind.”
     The more trust you bank, the less alignment you will need
internally.


Investors (your shareholders) need to align behind the
board’s final decision and need to trust your word that this is
the best direction.
     Chances are that your investors trust you a great deal
already. After all, they trusted millions of their hard-earned
dollars to your care. Regular, monthly updates on your trac-
tion and challenges are a must to avoid losing this trust and
maintaining enthusiasm for your vision.
     Your investors have already likely modeled out what your
company can be potentially worth one day. It is imperative to
understand these expectations and make sure that the offer
you bring to the table clears their return expectations. There are
no issues if you come with an offer that exceeds expectations.
No one complains about winning the lottery. The problem is
what happens if you are delivering an offer below expectations,
because they still need to approve your decision to sell.
     Investors need to sign off on your deal to proceed, period.
The way you carry their trust during these challenging
moments not only will guarantee their ultimate decision to
support you, but also their decision to back your next company.


32    //   E XIT RIGHT
HAVE AN ANNUAL EXIT TALK WITH THE BOARD TO SET AND
MAINTAIN EXPECTATIONS AND BUILD CREDIBILITY AND TRUST

The foundation of all trust is open communication. We all
know this instinctively, but we tend to forget it when we get
busy. We prioritize other issues and forget to stay in regu-
lar communication with the important stakeholders in our
organization. But you need to talk about selling your com-
pany with your stakeholders, often and consistently. Getting
acquired is not a bad thing, after all—a successful exit is the
desired outcome for most startups. What hurts is when the
acquisition is a surprise—a distraction from the shared com-
mitment everyone is there for.
   Start a conversation about selling too early, and the share-
holders will doubt the long-term commitment of the leader-
ship. Too resistant to a sale, and the shareholders will grow
frustrated with their expectations for a positive return. This
is a tough balancing act, but it should not prevent you from
discussing an exit at all.
   Unfortunately, the conventional wisdom is for founders to
virtually never discuss exits with shareholders. It is frowned
upon to talk about the sale—investors expect the founders
to constantly be focused on building an even bigger com-
pany until they are ready to cash out. The challenge is that if
the founders are bringing up the sale conversation, it looks
like they are interested in selling the company before the


                             BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   33
maximum value can be achieved. In other words, the board
will question the long-term commitment of the CEO if the
conversation comes up prematurely.
     Founders need to establish the expectation with their
boards that once a year, the group will add an agenda item
to the meeting related to the sale. It is simply a temperature
check on long-term strategy, potential strategic buyers, and
time horizons. This will allow you to build rapport, continue
the process of alignment, and establish the trust you need
to have a FAIR deal. The exit is one of the most important
moments in the life of a startup for the founders and inves-
tors alike. A conversation filled with anxiety, doubt, and mis-
trust serves no one. Carving out intentional space to have
these conversations in an open and honest fashion on a peri-
odic basis will improve outcomes for all parties.
     The secret to board (and shareholder) buy-in is consis-
tent communication on expectations and strategy to achieve
objectives. This is where the CEO can withdraw from the
trust bank that they have been putting the savings in over
the years with their consistent communication.
     The goal of these conversations is not to kick off a sale, but
to ensure there is alignment around key questions:


     • What is our threshold walk-away price?
     • What is the fund timeline to return proceeds for
           limited partners?


34    //    E XIT RIGHT
   • What objectives need to be accomplished for existing
     investors to further capitalize the company?
   • Who are the key buyers, old and new? With whom
     should the CEO be building relationships in those
     companies?
   • What is the key performance metric those buyers care
     about? What is the strategy to optimize that further?


  We call this the Exit Talk: a key ingredient for a successful
exit and effective governance. It is also an opportunity for a
CEO to educate their shareholders and board on what mat-
ters. These are the moments to build shareholder confidence,
define what the possible exit can look like, and execute on
that premise.
  It is true that if a founder never mentions a sale for eight
years and suddenly starts bringing up the topic to a board, it
signals a lack of energy to win even bigger. The reverse is also
true: VCs are managing a fund with return expectations. A
founder unaware of the dynamics of the investors and their
timeline doesn’t help the anxiety surrounding the sale.
  Instead of fueling the awkwardness of the exit topic by
staying silent, we are putting forward a new norm that we
believe the entire industry should adopt: the Exit Talk.
  The moment the founder shakes hands with the investor
who will join the board, they should agree to bring up this
question once a year: are we ready to sell our company? In


                           BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   35
most cases, the answer will be a simple no—but the space
itself will take out the anxiety that a founder will feel when
they bring up this question. This is one of the many norms we
hope to shift in the world of startups today, in order to take
the stigma out of this important conversation.
     In addition to the board, regular check-ins (about once a
year is the right cadence) with the core leadership team to
update them on the current thinking surrounding an exit are
similarly beneficial. Take the temperature of your team and
fill them in on where your head is. Is everybody still in the
game? Are there things we should be worried about? Is this
the right time to sell? Use correct judgment and limit the dis-
cussion to your top leadership, but be honest and transpar-
ent with the folks who will take the company to its ultimate
destination. If the ultimate goal is to go public, you need to
have extreme dedication from your key leadership to stick it
out long-term, not just from the founders.


DEVELOP A BUYER ECOSYSTEM EARLY

In 2015, Paul Graham, the YC founder, penned a controver-
sial essay, “Don’t Talk to Corp Dev.” In it, he makes the case
that thinking about exits distracts from growth and it’s not
helpful to have early conversations with your competition or
larger companies in your industry. And that in the worst-case
scenario, maybe your competition would even steal your idea.


36    //   E XIT RIGHT
  This kind of thinking pushes founders to the extremes.
The exit becomes a mythical, winning-the-lottery-type event
(with similar odds and returns), or the company goes out of
business through a stress sale.
   It’s just not how things work in the real world. It won’t
help your business be successful in its own right and it defi-
nitely won’t help you achieve a satisfying exit outcome. A
FAIR deal requires long-term relationships and mutual trust.
The acquirer needs to trust the projections based on past per-
formance and current momentum. Paul Graham’s advice is
just not practical for most startups; CEOs need to start build-
ing relationships early.
  Think of your relationships with corporate development
as similar to VCs. You don’t rely on these relationships to run
your business, but it helps to keep the lines of conversation
open. After all, an acquisition is basically a mega-funding
round with a much longer timeline.
  Anne Bonaparte is a seasoned technology CEO who has
successfully navigated eight acquisitions. She has spent
decades in the startup ecosystem and has tremendous wis-
dom in the art of identifying a key asset in whatever industry
she becomes a part of.
   One of the first things she does when she assumes the
leadership position is reach out to competitors, potential
acquirers, or strategic partners. Whether it is sharing the lat-
est industry trends, future regulatory changes, or potential


                           BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   37
shared customers—she always has a pulse on what the indus-
try values the most.
     As she stressed to us, “You want to be known.”
     This is the exact kind of activity that needs time, like
building your reputation. Mark learned this lesson when it
came time to sell his first company, the Whitewater Group. It
had been seven years. The company was growing, but slowly.
This was purgatory for the VCs and they were getting restless.
Mark made it a habit to reach out to the CEOs of his com-
petitors and develop good relations and open lines of com-
munication. He particularly focused on Gordon Eubanks, the
then-CEO of Symantec. Every time he went to the Valley, he
made sure to stop in and say hi to Gordon. Over the years
they developed a trusted relationship. When it came time to
sell the company, it was easy for Gordon to say yes.
     Experienced CEOs have an idea of the potential buyers of
their startup before they launch. In most marketplaces, there
are usually a handful of Fortune 500 competitors, followed
by a number of up-and-coming upstarts, and dozens of ear-
ly-stage startups. For most, the top prospects will come from
the large Fortune 500s. But it’s also good to keep an eye on
the fact that increasingly more financial buyers from tradi-
tional private equity firms are moving down-market to invest
in technology companies.
     You can easily find out online who the key executives are,
from the CEO down to the M&A leadership. Reach out to


38    //   E XIT RIGHT
them. As Anne says, make yourself a known entity. Touch
base with them once or twice a year. If you have trade shows
or large conferences, squeeze in a dinner or lunch meeting.
  A CEO who is not cultivating these personal relationships
is a CEO who is putting a ceiling on future value. The single
largest currency in every M&A transaction is trust. And to
earn trust, you must give it first. It takes years for people
to know who you are, what your company does, and most
importantly, your trajectory for the road ahead. The reason
why technology companies command many multiples on
their current revenues or enterprise value is not because of
where they are, but where they are going.
  The trust investments you are making along the way
should lead to an ecosystem of buyers, each representing
a unique vision for the future. Think of this as an explora-
tion of what the future can ultimately be—it’s an engaging
thought experiment to imagine what would be possible with
the resources of a huge company like Google.
  The time to start building that relationship is now. Your
historical financial reports, company presentations, and
news releases all serve to establish credibility for your future
projections. However, it is very difficult to establish you, the
founder, as trustworthy as a result of a one-hour meeting.
Knowing your buyers personally and keeping them abreast
of your progress gives them confidence to trust you when it
counts the most.


                           BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   39
     Depending on the size of your exit, this buyer network is
one of the values of having experienced bankers on your side.
However, there is nothing that can replace the personal cred-
ibility a founder can bring to the table. Conversely, if your
reputation is tainted among your competitors or your buyers,
the sale is over before it begins.
     Trust is also built indirectly. CEOs need to be part of the
influencer ecosystem that the buyer follows: press, analysts,
professional organizations, conferences, and more. Pair a
trustworthy persona with a genuine relationship, and the
buyers will line up to work with you. In some cases, time is
even a critical ingredient in and of itself.


INCREMENTAL STEPS TO
CREDIBILITY LEAD TO FUTURE
DECISIONS MADE WITH CONFIDENCE

Even if built over years, trust still needs to be maintained
throughout the thick of the sale process. Each interaction
with the buyer—now much more frequent—should lead to a
higher degree of trust.
     When a major customer has a multiyear contract with
their signature on it, your future revenue growth will be
more credible. When the buyers evaluate your turnover rate
over the years, they will understand that you have a tight-
knit team that has each other’s backs. Familiar investors on


40    //   E XIT RIGHT
your cap table will breed further trust that they are on the
right track to work with you.
  Remember, the final contract of a sale is ultimately a fancy
employment agreement for you. They are deciding to work
with you and invest a ton of resources to make that happen.
People don’t work with people they don’t trust. Just like the
buyer, you need to feel great about your new home, and trust
is the most important ingredient.
   Each side can afford a few backward steps if you are start-
ing from a foundation of trust and respect. Once you have
built this up, you still need to decide when the timing is right.




                            BUILDING T RU S T TAK E S T IME   //   41
C H A P T E R      3


WHEN IS THE RIGHT TIME
TO BEGIN THE ACTUAL
PROCESS OF A SALE?




K
      nowing when to transition from casual
      conversations and relationship building to a more pur-
      poseful process driven by urgency is a critical skill for
      every CEO.
  Ideally, the decision to initiate a serious sales process orig-
inates from the startup CEO as a result of long-term planning
efforts. Whether peaceful or contentious, a startup cannot
be sold with a leader who doesn’t want the transaction to
happen.
     A startup that has raised investor dollars is a startup
that’s for sale. Whether the leader is supportive or conten-
tious about the decision, a sale is the intended destination
for a company that has done any fundraising. Hopefully, you
will have already considered the expectations and timeline of
your investors for a liquidity event, and have been building
and banking trust with your investors, board, key employ-
ees, and the industry partners who will form the base of your
likely acquirers.
     A transaction can only happen when an acquirer is will-
ing to pay a premium on the current value of a business. The
amount of what that premium is—one that aligns everyone
around a decision—is the key detail to define.
     This is paramount. A responsible board will swiftly replace
a CEO who wants to sell the company before investors are
ready to sell, or one that is blocking a sale that the investors
are eager to proceed with. While an exit can be an awesome
event, it can also be the very reason that the CEO gets fired.
     If things go according to plan, the trigger event is not reac-
tionary. Ideally, the decision will be made proactively as part
of a broader set of actions, including building long-term rela-
tionships, creating an ecosystem of buyers, and stacking the
team in your favor.
     When a CEO is forced to sell the company, that is the wrong
time to sell. There are a number of situations that force a sale;
the most typical one is running out of capital and not being


44    //   E XIT RIGHT
able to raise more. Dubbed an asset sale, it means that the
investors and the team were forced to liquidate the company.
If the alternative is to go out of business, the buyer has all the
leverage in the world and will squeeze the process all the way
to the end to secure the minimum price. This is not a recipe
for success, in either the short or long term.
   Remember that no matter how many planning and nego-
tiation skills this book teaches you, the company must be
performing in order to have a successful exit. Now, assuming
that the company is crushing its key objectives, it is time to
pull the trigger to kick off an exit process.
   This chapter will put a lens on that trigger moment: the
decision point of when to make the call to sell. How can a
CEO know that it is the right time?
   What kind of sale is this?
   The typical image that comes to mind when a startup is
acquired is similar to a spaceship docking to a space station.
There is a much larger, more established company that the
startup engages with and eventually gets permanently tied
to. But this isn’t always the case.
   There are essentially four kinds of buyers of technology
startups.
   The first is a financial buyer. These are entities who buy
all or a significant portion of the company during an early
liquidity event. Typically, a financial buyer is a private equity
fund or is a late-stage investor. There is no strategic alignment


            BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE         //   45
necessary here. More often than not, a PE fund that special-
izes in a market will look for a two-to-three-times return in
four to eight years, depending on the fund size and dynamics.
They take on significantly less risk than a venture capitalist,
hence the need to buy out the existing shareholders.
     Such was the case with Emmi Solutions, a healthcare tech-
nology startup from Chicago where Mark held a seat on the
board. Founded in 2002, the company had raised $15 mil-
lion in venture financing, until it was recapitalized by Primus
Ventures in 2013 at a $70 million valuation. Some of the
existing investors cashed out at that price, with an accept-
able return. A majority of the investors kept their shares
as they approved the new direction. This greatly simplified
the cap table, which was flooded with smaller investors that
would have made a healthy acquisition virtually impossible.
With new leadership and fresh capital, the company crushed
its sales objectives and was eventually acquired by Wolters
Kluwer in 2016 for $170 million in an all-cash deal.
     Not every financial buyer is a positive return for sharehold-
ers. Especially when the company needs a fresh start, finan-
cial buyers can introduce significant downsides. For example,
a recapitalization event (also known as a recap) essentially
replaces the existing set of investors by diluting the existing
shareholders. Usually, these are moments where the company
genuinely found its footing, albeit a little later than the time
frame that the early shareholders or the founding executive


46    //   E XIT RIGHT
team predicted. Financial buyers of established companies
may also borrow a significant amount of money, “or leverage”
to make the transaction. This debt load becomes part of the
company and can be a significant drag on profitability.
  An alternative to a recap is known as a roll-up, where the
PE fund will acquire adjacent companies to create a platform
of services. This is an effort to integrate a number of busi-
nesses to create end-to-end solutions that carry a premium.
For instance, imagine an online food-ordering application, a
menu scraping tool, and a delivery fleet coming together to
build Uber Eats.
  There are exceptions in every case, but a private equity
fund’s main objective is to acquire an ownership position in
an already established business and further the profitability
of the company by streamlining the operations. The existing
leadership team (including the founders) is typically replaced
with a new group of leaders to make that happen, which
means it’s not always the right answer for companies.
  Those who don’t want a financial buyer may consider a
competitive buyer: in markets where two companies with
similar products compete head-to-head with similar services,
one company can purchase the other to increase their market
share. Typically, this is not an ideal outcome financially, as it
means that the one side won.
  While the financial return is likely not great, this will be a
very smooth process since the integration is much easier. The


         BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE           //   47
buyer will know where the employees belong in the parent
company and will be able to serve the existing set of custom-
ers with a similar service.
     Founders may also consider public buyers, where the
broader public buys small pieces of the company during its
initial public offering. This is still very much a liquidation
event; however, it does not result in a change in the direction
of the company. Instead, it is a vote of confidence in the exist-
ing momentum of the company. While there are always cases
of activist investors who want to alter that trajectory, more
often than not, a retail investor is simply looking to make a
decent return by buying low and selling high.
     A very small percentage of technology companies that are
successful end up going public. It is a significant liquidity
event for virtually all shareholders.
     Lastly, we have strategic buyers. This is the spaceship
we want to dock in. The best kind of buyer, these are usu-
ally opportunistic, larger companies looking to further their
goals exponentially with the acquisition.
     Getting acquired by a strategic buyer could mean an
increase to your bottom line, competitive access to key cus-
tomers, strengthening the technologic advantage, and more.
In short, this is likely the most lucrative financial outcome.
The buyer isn’t purchasing the company’s assets as is—they
are purchasing the company’s potential impact on the much
bigger company. For example, a 10 percent lift for McDonald’s


48    //   E XIT RIGHT
sales is worth billions, and if the startup can make a legitimate
case for how their technology can accomplish that, they will
drive the price up. The best-case scenario is that there are a
handful of strategic buyers that your startup can add value to.


WHAT ARE YOU SELLING? DEFINE YOUR KEY ASSET

When you determine whom you’re going to sell to, it’s
important to focus on what you’re selling, so that you know
exactly how to position yourself to the right buyers. Every
buyer has a “key value” in mind when they consider acquiring
a company. This doesn’t mean that the rest of the company’s
performance is negligible, but there is always one metric that
matters more than others.
  To identify what that is, we begin with empathy towards
the objective(s) of the buyers. By clearly knowing who they
are, we can also start discovering what they value the most.
A competitor that is focused on gaining more market share
will put less value on your EBITDA than a protected techni-
cal edge. Certain companies care about IP, others care about
speed of innovation. Your buyer might be playing defense for
protecting their sales, instead of fighting for new custom-
ers. The kinds of value an acquisition can bring varies, but
it is quantifiable, and something you should work to under-
stand in each sale. Remember when analysts were baffled
by Facebook’s purchase of Instagram for nearly $1 billion?


         BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE            //   49
All they saw was a company that barely made any meaning-
ful money being gobbled up for way too much. They failed
to see what Mark Zuckerberg saw. They didn’t know how
Instagram had positioned themselves to fulfill a need he had
for Facebook. And now, Instagram is estimated to be worth
$100 billion within the walls of Facebook.
     A seasoned CEO will know what they are selling.
Optimizing this asset—whether it is your costs, growth rates,
profits, or talent—should be your top priority before the
trigger is pulled. For instance, if your top metric is growth
rates in users, you need to start improving that to a predict-
able cadence three to four years in a row prior to a sale. This
furthers your ability to forecast into the future and secure a
price based on what will happen. If you get this right, the key
asset becomes the core of the rationale behind the acquisition.


THE KEY MOMENT: THE LOCAL MAXIMUM

Once a CEO understands what they are selling and whom
they are selling it to, the question of when exactly to sell
becomes much clearer. We call this the local maximum: there
is increasing momentum for our key asset, but there are
challenges on the horizon that will need time and resources
to overcome.
     For Alex White, the CEO of Next Big Sound, this moment
materialized in January 2015, when one of his competitors


50    //   E XIT RIGHT
got acquired by Apple. In a limited world of acquirers, tak-
ing a major player off the table is always a scary moment. It
had been seven years since he founded the company, and he
was struggling to find the motivation and positive growth
outlook to push further. The acquisition of their competi-
tor, coupled with likely having to raise a Series B in nine
months when they still didn’t have a repeatable, scalable
sales playbook, was a lot to face! Looking back, he acknowl-
edged, “I was exhausted. And it was a very draining and iso-
lating time, because I felt like I couldn’t talk to anyone about
wanting to sell.”
  He continued, “I knew this was as good a time as any to
explore selling the company. I knew it was our local maxi-
mum moment. In February 2015 Next Big Sound was named
by Fast Company as the most innovative company in the
music industry and to their Top 50 list of ‘Most Innovative
Companies’ in the world. This was our best chance to have
the best outcome for my team and investors.”
   Seasoned executive teams can anticipate the obstacles in
front of them, even when everything appears to be meet-
ing expectations. They can read the signs from the future
and make decisions about their local maximum. Perhaps
conversion rates are going down, customer acquisition
costs are going up, new competitors are entering the mar-
ket, or something even smaller. This is not the same thing
as momentum dying. These are cases where the leadership


         BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE           //   51
team is aware and can articulate what needs to be overcome
to grow even more. This nuance is the difference between
a strategic acquisition and an asset sale that is spiraling
towards an eventual death.
     The local maximum is a moment in your timeline when
the valuation for the company is confidently based on your
trajectory, in spite of the challenges ahead. This is the best
time to sell your startup.
     In any transaction, you are essentially trading your hard
work for what the market is willing to pay. Your progress to
date, cash in the bank, and sales momentum are all easy to
quantify. As a result, the multiples that companies are willing
to pay for those are relatively low. A credible trajectory that
the buyer believes in alters that.
     Essentially, people will be paying a premium today on what
you will do together in the future. The most significant lever-
age that a capable executive team has is their ability to attract
further capital to overcome future challenges. This translates
to a future price that is much higher than it is today. We will
discuss negotiating this price in Part 2 of the book. For now,
just know that the local maximum is when your future efforts
dictate your price more than your current performance.
     If a buyer is interested in an acquisition in spite of the
future challenges, it also shows that the buyer is committed to
your mutual vision. This makes for a true long-term partner.




52    //   E XIT RIGHT
TEAM, BOARD, AND SHAREHOLDER ALIGNMENT

So far, we discussed an ecosystem of strategic buyers, an
understanding of the key value you bring to the table, and
continued momentum in terms of performance. Prior to sit-
ting down with your board for a formal vote, you need one
more key ingredient: alignment with your board and share-
holders on price and timing.
  Venture-backed companies typically have investor rights
that can block a sale. Investor block of a sale is no small mat-
ter. It can kill a sale and the credibility of the CEO along with
it in the eyes of the buyer. If this happens, you can safely
assume that the existing CEO will be replaced. Investors and
boards have little recourse if they disagree on a sale; they
have only the blunt instruments to approve the sale or go in
a new strategic direction by replacing the CEO.
   Knowing that the sale is going to happen with or without the
current CEO’s support, the most important factor to agree on
is the price. Let’s say that the board determines the sale price
to be three times the last post-money valuation of the company.
In other words, if the investors bought 10 percent of the com-
pany for $1 million, they bought the shares when the company
was worth $11 million. The purchaser needs to offer $33 mil-
lion or higher for that investment to be worth three times more.
   It is incumbent upon the CEO to challenge their board
on this point. Is everyone prepared to walk away if the offer


         BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE            //   53
is $32.5 million? If the answer is that the board would con-
sider that offer, push back on the expectations. This number
should not be defined as a range; the offer either exceeds the
threshold or it doesn’t. Be sure to avoid confusing this num-
ber with what your company is worth—valuation is in the
eye of the beholder.
     Also, remember that even when you arrive at an agreed-
upon number, it doesn’t mean that a transaction will immedi-
ately happen if the offer is above the threshold. It just indicates
that the board will evaluate an offer above that price. Avoid
strong-arming a decision to reach alignment—a decision born
out of tension will have painful effects later in the process.
     Most investors should be thrilled with the outcome, and a
handful can be neutral towards it, but none should be against
the decision. This is also important in order to continue work-
ing together as a team if the acquisition falls through due to
unintended consequences. Again, the most important ingre-
dient here is trust: do the shareholders trust your judgment
that this offer is the best possible outcome for everyone?
     Remember that even though the decisions can be commu-
nicated verbally, always follow up in writing to materialize
commitments. The rule of thumb is that no alignment is real
without a paper trail; so if things don’t go as expected, people
can’t forget the promises they’ve made.
     Finally, make sure that this alignment is revisited with
key milestones such as a signed term sheet, finalized closing


54    //   E XIT RIGHT
documents, milestone agreements—anything and every-
thing that impacts the distribution of funds needs to be
communicated to maintain alignment. When it is all said and
done, whether the outcome is bad, good, or great, it shouldn’t
be a surprise to any shareholder.


RESPONDING TO ACQUISITION
OFFERS BEFORE IT IS THE RIGHT TIME

One of the most common questions we face as mentors to
other companies is about unsolicited flying offers (UFOs).
What should you say if an interested party knocks on the
door when you aren’t ready?
   David Cohen, the founder of Techstars (the largest global
technology accelerator), has seen it all. Over the past fifteen
years, hundreds of Techstars companies have been acquired.
His first advice to founders who have a UFO in their hands is
to have an honest conversation about price. Assuming that
the Exit Talks have been happening, you should already have
a number in your head.
   The fact that there is an offer with a number should not
change that figure. David counsels founders to take the floor
value of any “range” that they offer for the final price. He says,
“The lowest number they say is all you should hear—ignore
the rest of the outreach because the actual offer is very likely
to end up being very close to the low end of the range unless


         BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE            //   55
there are multiple competing offers. If the low number isn’t
high enough to be interesting, then your best bet is to sim-
ply tell them that and politely decline to provide any other
information.”
     Understand that there is absolutely nothing more pow-
erful you can say as a CEO than “not now” to a buyer. This
is a great opportunity to kick off a discussion to create the
elements of a FAIR deal and plan for an exit when the time
is right. We view an acquisition offer as a great conversation
starter to understand what the buyer is thinking strategically.
     As a founder, you can always do that without formally
evaluating an offer. For instance, a potential acquirer might
get wind that you are fundraising and offer to invest in the
round. Whether you let them invest or not, don’t waste the
opportunity to have a conversation about their rationale.
Why do they see you as a good investment? An M&A team
will welcome a seasoned CEO who responds maturely in the
following manner: “Thank you; we are grateful to hear you
are interested in investing/making an offer. We are operating
according to our growth plan and believe there is still plenty
of value we can capture before we can formally entertain an
offer. However, I’d love to understand why you are interested
in our future. Let’s get to know each other.”
     Know that if an offer is too good to be true, it isn’t. Saying
“no” gracefully will allow you to start building trust from
a position of mutual respect, and that’s a great thing. If


56    //   E XIT RIGHT
anything, a UFO is a great checkpoint to see if you can check
the boxes in our criteria. You may even see that now is the
right time to sell after all.
   This is also an opportunity for you to ask questions and get
to better know a potential acquirer down the road. What do
they care about? What do they value—tech, people, IP, top-
line revenue, profitability? Remember that every interaction
with a company should also be a two-way street of informa-
tion flow.




          BEGINNING THE ACTUAL PROCESS OF A SALE         //   57
C H A P T E R       4


WHO ARE KEY
STAKEHOLDERS?




I
 n the FAIR framework, alignment is one of the
  hardest elements to get right. There are so many different
  individuals involved on both sides of the deal.
      Each side has many stakeholders, often with competing
interests. And each side must be aligned internally—with
the same vision, goals, and spirit of cooperation—in order to
successfully get a deal done together. Add third parties like
bankers and lawyers into the mix and it can be a potent stew
of egos and personalities.
    As challenging as it is, make no mistake: it is the job of
the startup founder to bring together both teams. To ensure
alignment not only on your side, but on the side of your
acquirers as well. There will be many aspects you cannot con-
trol, but our point here is to counsel you not to leave align-
ment on the buyer side to chance. Understand who all of the
key decision makers are—what drives them, how they evalu-
ate risk, and what they’re looking for in the outcome.
     To ensure alignment internally on both sides and create
alignment when both sides come together, we first have to
know who all the players are around the table.


SELL-SIDE STAKEHOLDERS

Let’s begin this journey by understanding the most import-
ant players from the sell side and the roles they play in the
process. Those are:


     • Key leadership of the startup
     • The legal team
     • The investment banker (advisor to the CEO during
           the sale)
     • The board of directors
     • The shareholders


Leadership Team
Key leadership of the startup needs to be aligned and
informed during a sale. Without a concerted effort to keep


60    //     E XIT RIGHT
everyone on the same page and engaged in the sales conver-
sation, you risk turning a very exciting time into one of the
most miserable things you’ll ever experience.
  Selling a company will be one of the most distracting
activities that you will take on during the entire journey of a
startup. It is imperative that, as the CEO, you are being trans-
parent with the direction you want to take the company in,
as well as evaluating options around M&A when the time is
right. You’re also expected to do this while keeping company
performance and growth moving.
  The distractions will be particularly high during the eval-
uation period. Many acquiring companies spend this period
of time asking questions, trying to understand every piece
of the business. While you’ll likely be part of each of these
meetings, it’ll be impossible to do it alone. At some point,
you’re going to need to rely on other members of the lead-
ership team to help you out. If you haven’t done a thorough
job keeping everyone up to date with the most current infor-
mation and feedback, the meetings will be much less produc-
tive—or perhaps even disastrous—without you.
  Let’s be honest, the very real possibility of immediate
wealth creation is distracting. Experienced teams know that
counting the money before the deal is done will only create
problems, so they keep focused on maintaining the momen-
tum that made the acquisition possible in the first place.
Unfortunately, too many first-time founders and executive


                         W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   61
teams start creating spreadsheets to calculate their take-
home proceeds modeled out at certain exit levels after just
a single positive meeting early in the process. They will stop
prioritizing key business deliverables and start equating vic-
tory with getting the deal across the finish line.
     The first problem with this is the probable consequence
that a quarter (or two) of lost momentum will cause the
acquirer to get cold feet. Suddenly, the projections stop look-
ing believable, the optimism changes to doubt, and the foun-
dations of trust begin to shake.
     The second problem is the demoralization of the team if
the deal falls apart for any reason.
     Life is challenging at a startup. A failed deal can kill the
motivation to keep pushing. If you are already fatigued from
a long journey to a potential exit, being let down is a tough
pill to swallow.
     The important balance to strike is between transparency
(to ensure leadership is aligned) and realism (to keep people
focused). For most cases, we recommend the following order
of communications to your leadership team:


     1. Once the board formally approves an acquisition
           process, gather the leadership to discuss the
           direction. Outside of executive board members, this
           should be the first time they are hearing that a deal is
           on the horizon.


62    //   E XIT RIGHT
2. Caution the team that the likely outcome is that a
    deal won’t happen. There are a number of factors that
    impact the take-home price, so ask for their trust
    that you will represent all of their interests along
    with the rest of the shareholders.


3. Reiterate how many stars need to align for a deal
    to happen. Talk about the strategic nature of the
    potential partnership and why it makes sense
    to join forces. Highlight the connection to the
    mission to begin with—this is all that matters in
    the long run.


4. Appoint one or two key executives as “advisors”
    to the CEO, typically the CFO and one of the key
    co-founders. In the early stages, this is very similar to
    a fundraiser. A simpler version of the financial model
    needs to be created along with an executive deck to
    tell the story of the future.


5. Until a term sheet is signed, there should be no
    reason for the rest of the executive team to join the
    introductory meetings or the debriefs. Afterwards,
    while the closing documents are being drawn
    up, they will be involved in functional diligence
    meetings.


                       W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   63
     6. The agreed-upon term sheet will paint the broad
           strokes of a transaction and should include
           important details like timeline, risk mitigators,
           and price. However, your leadership team needs
           to know things outside of the document, for
           instance: the plan to integrate, the rationale
           behind the transaction, and the diligence process.
           We recommend that the term sheet is only shared
           with the board and the advisor team. That being
           said, the signing of a term sheet calls for another
           alignment meeting between the key leaders in the
           organization.


     As the certainty of closing the deal increases, the transpar-
ency around additional details such as final price, tax impli-
cations, and HR impact is critical. Remember that the more
your leadership knows, the more disappointed they will be in
the event of failure. Use your judgment wisely to determine
when the team needs to be brought in. After all, you need
them on your side for the deal to be successful once the trans-
action is complete.
     The following page has additional thoughts on specific
functions within the team and the level of transparency
they need.




64    //   E XIT RIGHT
HIGH TRANSPARENCY

Co-Founders   Assuming that you all are significant shareholders or hold
              board seats, you should be up front and share everything. They
              are almost in your exact position and can give you the sound
              support that you need. This is regardless of the functional role
              that they hold in the company.

MID-HIGH TRANSPARENCY

Finance       Outside of your closest circle, this is the most important
              function to come alongside you. From various modeling
              needs to key questions on taxes, sales projections, revenue
              numbers, and runway at hand—finance needs to be right
              beside the CEO.

MID TRANSPARENCY

Product       Figuring out the long-term product roadmap in order to
              find exciting milestones to drive towards is a useful exercise.
              How would the products complement each other? What is
              the practical value for the shared customers? Your product
              leadership can answer these questions, but it is wasteful to
              have the discussion for more than one or two companies.

LOW TRANSPARENCY

Sales/        Other than customer diligence, sales and marketing teams
Marketing     should be focused all the way to ensure numbers are looking
              good until the signature date.

Engineering   Outside of IP review and engineering diligence calls, there
              really should be little need for the engineering team to interact
              with the M&A process.

Operations    This is the most important component—the day-to-day
              operations of the business, such as customer success, supply
              chain, HR, etc., should be kept out of the discussions until the
              last phase of the diligence and integration. This is typically the
              largest source of risk given the proximity to the customer base.




                               W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?         //   65
Board of Directors
A startup’s board should be active. An aligned board will
add credibility and support the CEO during the exit process.
Founders need to articulate a clear vision to lead the strategy
and execution of the deal. And investors on the board need to
bring their experience to bear to add value long-term.
     In a startup, the board’s main responsibility is to ask these
two tough questions:


     1. Do we have the right CEO?
     2. Is it the right time to sell? (In other words, should
           we keep growing with our profits or by raising
           more capital?)


     This is where old wounds in the fundraising process,
infighting among members, and lack of ownership by
the CEO during board meetings show up to hurt you. We
strongly recommend following best practices in board
meetings: control the narrative, create consistent and
timely materials, and develop relevant metrics. There are
excellent resources online to upgrade your performance in
board meetings. Our recommendation is to add to that list
an annual Exit Talk to make your life easier during the sale
process of the company.
     The judgment of the CEO during these discussions is a
critical answer to the first responsibility of the board. By


66    //   E XIT RIGHT
demonstrating a steady helm through these conversations,
CEOs gain invaluable trust points from their boards.


Legal Team
The difference between a business lawyer and an M&A lawyer
will determine not only the quality of your term sheet, but
also the quality of your overall exit experience. This is the
only absolutely necessary component of a successful exit in
terms of outside service providers. You must—and we can’t
stress this enough—hire a specialist firm with experience
in startup M&A. This is not the time to hire your friendly
startup lawyer who has never done a transaction before. Do
not feel an obligation to the team that has supported you
during the fundraising process or day-to-day legal support. If
they have your best interest at heart, they will likely recom-
mend a colleague who specializes in startup M&A.
  An unsophisticated legal team will lead to subpar under-
standing of deal risks, or worse, unwarranted paranoia about
every term proposed by the opposing counsel. A good law-
yer will identify the most important points to negotiate and
will not create unnecessary obstacles. “What you want to
make sure you do,” said David Sobota, who leads corp dev at
Instacart after thirteen years at Google, “is assess how goal-ori-
ented and pragmatic your legal team is. Make sure they know
the job is to get over the finish line and not get bogged down
in minutiae.” Furthermore, from complicated tax matters to


                          W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   67
measuring exposure in the escrow terms, there are too many
factors that require specialization and experience to go with,
say, your cousin from Columbus. Even the best of relation-
ships won’t make up for the price you’ll pay for lack of exper-
tise. You never want to realize that the reason you got screwed
on a deal was because your lawyer made a mistake.
     Use the best legal team you can afford, and work with your
board and shareholders to get recommendations on firms.
This will lead to an efficient process, and you will have sound
judgment on your side throughout the process.


Investment Bankers
While there is a clear reason that bankers exist, it is unclear
if every startup acquisition needs one. In the event a banker
is necessary, it’s important for first-time founders (and all
founders for that matter) to know how to conduct diligence
before hiring a banker, and the best ways to utilize one.
     A credible investment banker who has worked with the
acquirer in the past can help accelerate the process. A banker
also signals that there are multiple potential buyers involved.
But this is a dicey game that does not always work out in
your favor. All in all, a banker polishes the company before
an acquisition through coaching, broad outreach, or strategic
relationship building.
     In an ideal world, they will help you negotiate better terms
for the deal by creating competition around it. If this were all


68    //   E XIT RIGHT
bankers added to the equation, it would make total sense to
include them in every sale. Unfortunately, it is not always an
ideal world, and sometimes they add more headaches (and
costs) than they’re worth.
  There are two components to a banker’s fee:


   • A monthly escrow that will count towards the final
     fees. This can be negotiated down to zero in most
     cases, accompanied by the proper percentage fee.


   • A percentage of the final acquisition price. It is
     crucial to confirm how the payment will take place
     in various scenarios: Will the payment come out
     before or after the escrow is taken out? What if
     there are milestone payments tied to the deal?
     Make sure the bankers are aligned on the structure
     you want in the deal. We have seen numbers
     ranging from 1–5 percent for average-sized deals in
     the technology space.


  A good rule of thumb is to remember that most tech deals
done for under $75 million (as of 2021) are typically done
without bankers. In those cases, the CEO uses their existing
network to find a buyer and negotiate a fair price for the right
exit. For these types of tech acquisitions, founders should
be doing the work to identify interested parties and build


                          W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   69
relationships in their buyer ecosystem. This is not an abso-
lute rule, just a suggestion to proceed with care.
     That being said, there are legendary examples of bankers
creating immense value. For instance, the famous role that
Mike Grimes from Morgan Stanley played in the WhatsApp
transaction: in February 2014, a report he authored leaked
to the senior executive offices of Google, Facebook, and many
other notable tech companies. It essentially analyzed the
same growth data that Sequoia and Facebook used to iden-
tify WhatsApp as a key acquisition target.
     Years later, the sector still buzzes with speculation as to
what exactly happened. Did Mike leak the information on
purpose to make the market more competitive? Was this an
honest mistake? We can’t be sure. We do know that report
ultimately led to an initial meeting between Jan Koum and
Larry Page, then-CEO of Google. While the meeting with
Google wasn’t successful (Page was half an hour late), it set
off the frenzied pace of events that led Mark Zuckerberg to
offer an essentially blank check. The rest is history, and the
largest technology acquisition in modern history closed for
$19 billion.
     The banker who represented WhatsApp in the deal? Mike
Grimes from Morgan Stanley.
     If you do decide to hire a banker, obviously hiring the right
one is critical, and you should undertake a thorough diligence
period to determine the right fit. Evaluate everything from


70    //   E XIT RIGHT
personal chemistry to relevant network access in your target
industry. A banker is essentially a broker, and you can save a
lot of time by paying for experience.
   Once you like a team, confirm that the partner on the deal
will be present in the conversations. Request a list of past
CEOs they have worked with, and evaluate past transactions
they have been involved in. Avoid people who claim that they
have a 100 percent close rate on the deals they decide to facil-
itate—this is virtually impossible.


Shareholders
With all other elements in place, there’s still one final piece
to your exit that needs to be strategically managed and
accounted for. The majority of preferred shareholders will
need to approve the final transaction. Without their approval,
you have no way to move forward.
  You will likely need consent from the majority of share-
holders, both common and preferred shares. Typically, the
common shares are mostly made up of the founding team, so
assuming that you are aligned internally, that should be the
easier part.
  Your preferred shareholders will also have to give you their
blessing. They all need to agree with you, and with each other,
that this is the right time to sell. You must have the majority
on your side—there is no other way to force the hand of an
unwilling investor without things getting ugly.


                         W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   71
     And you want to make sure things don’t get ugly with
investors right before an exit because corp dev teams avoid
these situations like the plague. Even with an escrow set
aside to mitigate future problems, no one wants to deal with
the fallout from angry investors down the road.
     Your best-case scenario is that you have support from the
start—that all shareholders trust your judgment through
effective board management and company leadership. Clear,
transparent investor updates will make sure that your inves-
tors are already familiar with the key challenges, opportuni-
ties, and the timeline ahead. It will build the trust you need
to move forward with their support.
     We also recommend that you provide transparent com-
munication even after the board shows their support. The
assumption here is that you have an active board that
includes your largest shareholders. Having a near-majority
included on your side in your initial outreach makes it easier
for the shareholders to feel good about the upcoming deal.
When in doubt, overcommunicate. Make yourself available
for one-on-one phone calls, explain why the timing is FAIR,
and confirm that there is certainty to close. Use all the trust
you have accumulated to win your investors over and cross
the finish line.
     And get them over the finish line you must, because one
of the critical components of the closing docs is the consent
threshold—the percentage of approving shareholders you


72    //   E XIT RIGHT
need in order to execute the transaction. Keep open lines of
communication and make sure to use a digital signature tool
similar to DocuSign at all costs. Depending on the risk toler-
ance of the buyer, the threshold can range from 51 percent
to 100 percent! The rule of thumb is that the simpler the cap
table (i.e., the fewer investors to manage), the easier your life
is going to be.
   So far, we’ve covered all of the key stakeholders on the
startup side of the table. Next, we evaluate the buyer side of
the equation.


BUY-SIDE STAKEHOLDERS

Now that we know all the key players from your side of the
acquisition, it’s important to know who you’ll be talking to
and negotiating with throughout the process on the buyer’s
side. Although these aren’t hard rules, you can expect to talk
to a representative from each of these groups during any sale.
Here’s who you need to be aware of:


   • The corporate development team will act as the air
      traffic control throughout the process.
   • The business unit is the ultimate home for the startup
      within the parent.
   • Executive leadership negotiates the final terms of the
      purchase.


                           W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   73
     • Buyer legal teams need to be managed throughout
           the process.
     • There are unique cases where buyers will have their
           own bankers.
     • Final approvals will come from the board of directors.
     • With big enough mergers, large public shareholders
           will need to approve, along with the US government
           through the Federal Trade Commission.


     Once there is stable, continuous alignment internally, it
is imperative to ensure the same happens on the buy side. As
the CEO, you are in a unique position. You’ll be negotiating
a complex process, often with opposing opinions and goals,
with individuals that you’ll need to collaborate with imme-
diately after the deal is done. With this in mind, approach
every conversation, especially the tough ones, with empa-
thy, collaboration, and confidence in mind. You’re going to
need it.
     It is almost guaranteed that not everything will go accord-
ing to plan. Tensions may rise, conflict is inevitable, and
maintaining alignment is difficult. In order to achieve the
best outcome possible, you need to know who all of the
other players are on the other side and their own process for
achieving alignment. Let’s begin with the air traffic control of
the process: the corporate development team.




74    //     E XIT RIGHT
Corporate Development Team
There are many names for the core group of executives who
are responsible for buying companies: M&A team, corporate
development, business development. Consider this group
the quarterback of the entire operation. They are the ones
herding each side to a final decision. In certain companies,
M&A teams operate as an extension of the product devel-
opment team—for instance, at Apple. While the leadership
makes the final call, Apple views M&A as a key part of devel-
oping new products, with notable examples like NeXT, Siri,
iPod, and many others.
   In other companies, M&A is much more focused on long-
term business strategy than on product. This is one of the
first questions that an entrepreneur should ask when they
meet a new company: what is the strategic objective of their
acquisition engine? Before you can move forward in any exit
process, you need to be able to understand—but more impor-
tantly, agree with—their overall strategic vision and the
steps they’ve identified that will help get them to their goals.


The Business Unit
Next, you will evaluate the business unit on the buyer’s side.
This will be the ultimate home for your startup within the par-
ent company when the deal is done. It is your final destina-
tion and thus, it is imperative to develop relationships with as
many people as possible in this group throughout the process.


                          W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   75
There will be times that the acquiring company will close
these doors until a deal is complete, so do as much work as
you can, as early as possible, so that you have all the necessary
information to make the right exit for you and your company.
     If you get the sense that the buyers closed the doors to
their business unit too soon, or too frequently, it might indi-
cate that the buyer has an opaque culture with siloed opera-
tions or doubts that the deal may or may not get across the
finish line. This is a point to lean forward and make these
connections happen.
     Ask about who you will be reporting to, as this is the clear-
est signal towards your ultimate home. After the first meeting
with that stakeholder, you need to be able to clearly articu-
late their goals and objectives with your acquisition. This is
extremely critical because their goals and objectives will ulti-
mately come to define the integration process. Sometimes
you fall in love with the person they are recommending that
you report to. Sometimes the chemistry is just not there.
Don’t panic. Take more time to get to know that person. If
the fit is just not there, there is an opportunity to go to the
deal lead from corp dev (or the CEO, if you are dealing with
them directly) and gently and respectfully ask for alterna-
tives or suggestions. If there are no alternatives, this actually
might be a deal killer. Most mergers don’t pan out when the
CEO and their new direct report don’t see eye to eye. As we
all know, a bad boss can suck the joy out of life.


76    //   E XIT RIGHT
  Just like any relationship within the acquirer, these rela-
tionships are best built over time to understand complemen-
tary businesses. Remember that the best rationale isn’t to
join forces with a competitor, it is unlocking new levels of
growth for both companies.
   Having an ally parallel to the corporate development team
is key to push for better terms. If the business unit is prod-
uct-oriented, inquire about the key metrics your technology
will impact. Use these conversations to define the internal
value of your startup. This is the best leverage in the long term:
a clearly articulated vision will soften terms to your advantage.
   Depending on the place in the organizational structure,
this leader is typically different from the group who will need
to sign off on the purchase.


Executive Leadership
On the buy side, the top executive (usually the CEO) is the
final approver of the terms of the purchase. This is where
the buck stops in the organization. Typically, the corporate
development team reports directly to the CEO or the CFO.
For any meaningful transaction, both these groups will need
to give their blessing.
  This is, bar none, the best entry into the process. A rela-
tionship built over a long time with a seasoned CEO will give
the most tangible insights into rationale, defining comple-
mentary avenues and ensuring the smoothest process.


                          W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   77
     Even for a company worth above a trillion dollars like
Amazon, this is no exception. To date, Jeff Bezos personally
signs off on every deal worth above $10 million.
     This is also the final thread to pull during the negotiation
process. If the deal terms are at an impasse, this is the only
person who can make a difference.
     There is no better way that we can demonstrate the impor-
tance of a healthy, proactive relationship with executive lead-
ership than Mark’s personal encounter with Bill Gates. After
the Whitewater Group sold to Symantec, Mark ran a small
company of game developers called Kinesoft. One day, a
genius programmer on the team figured out how to move the
bits around the screen fast enough to play Sega and Nintendo
scrolling action arcade games on personal computers for the
very first time.
     This revolutionary breakthrough at Kinesoft happened to
line up as Microsoft was planning their own game-changing
software with the launch of Windows 95. After years of try-
ing, Windows 95 was finally ready to take on Macintosh as
the operating system for everyone.
     Kinesoft moved quickly to reframe their business model
by creating a porting engine that would take existing Sega
and Nintendo games and easily bring them over and convert
them to Windows 95. In essence, Kinesoft became the bridge
between the multibillion-dollar console gaming market and
the emerging multibillion-dollar PC market.


78    //   E XIT RIGHT
   Mark quickly signed deals with major game publishers to
port their titles over to Windows 95 in anticipation of its
launch in April 1995. This started to get the attention of the
major industry players and by March 1995, Sega, Intel, and
IBM all tried to either invest in or buy Kinesoft.
  All of this culminated one Monday afternoon with a phone
call from Microsoft. It was one of Bill’s lieutenants, reaching
out to Mark for help:
  “Bill Gates is at Spring Comdex in Atlanta and he has a prob-
lem. Tomorrow morning, he is scheduled to give the keynote
address where he is officially going to introduce and launch
Windows 95. His presentation is going to show Windows at
work and Windows at home where he is going to show a game
that Microsoft developed for Windows 95. Except our game
doesn’t work. Can you fly to Atlanta tonight and show your
game that runs on Windows 95 to him?”
   Mark immediately hopped on a plane to Atlanta. He
arrived at Bill’s suite around midnight and immediately
demonstrated the Kinesoft team’s work. The next day in his
presentation, Bill not only launched Windows 95, but he also
gave a demo of the very game Mark had shown him just hours
earlier. Bill even called Kinesoft out and gave them credit in
front of the world. Unbeknownst to Mark, he also met with
Masayoshi Son, the CEO of SoftBank, who had just bought
Comdex, and they decided to form a new joint venture game
company to create games for Windows.


                         W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   79
     Weeks later, IBM came in with an offer to buy the company.
IBM was launching their new operating system called OS2
and they wanted Kinesoft to help build their games studio.
After some fevered negotiations, Mark verbally agreed to all
the major deal points and headed to LA for the very first E3
games show. The goal was to make a major joint announce-
ment, while the attorneys headed to New York with the
signed deal documents. It looked like everything was in order.
     Mark arrived in LA on a Monday. The big announcement
and press conference was scheduled for Thursday. However,
back in New York, the IBM attorneys started changing the
deal. Nothing was bad enough to kill the deal entirely, but
onerous enough to give the young founder pause. Big com-
pany lawyers twisting the knife at the last minute to “protect”
their clients.
     Within the same hour, Mark also got a call from Japan.
It was an immediate meeting request from Masayoshi Son.
Mark patiently explained that he couldn’t fly to Japan, that
Kinesoft was about to announce a deal with IBM. Masa would
not take no for an answer: “We promise we will make this
worth your while. Bill Gates said we have to work with you!”
     The next morning the two partners ushered into a meeting
with Masayoshi Son while the attorneys in New York were at
an impasse.
     After the usual pleasantries, Masa looked at both of them
and asked, “How much for your company? Bill Gates says you


80    //   E XIT RIGHT
are the only company in the world that can build Windows
games at scale.” Not bad for an introduction!
   Mark didn’t blink. He gave a number that was four times
what IBM was offering them. Masa accepted on the spot.
They shook hands and eleven days later, the deal was closed
and the money was in the bank.
  This kind of speed is only possible if you are working with
the ultimate decision makers.


Legal Teams
Buyers will have their own legal representation as outside
counsel. They usually consist of a key group of stakeholders
that you, hopefully, never directly interact with. It is safe to
assume that the buyer will use sophisticated counsel with
plenty of experience in acquiring companies.
  The most important point to keep in mind is that you
should never negotiate directly with lawyers. Keep the back-
and-forth to a minimum while working out the issues, and
always go through your own (highly experienced!) counsel.
If there are strategic decisions that need to be made, they
should be decided between business unit members or exec-
utive leaders, not between the two legal teams. These guide-
lines will help ensure that you don’t get bogged down in
legal minutiae or spin cycles (and billable hours) arguing the
wrong point with the wrong person.




                          W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   81
Investment Bankers/Advisors
There are unique cases where buyers will have their own
bankers or a group of third-party advisors for the sale. While
these are rare, they will typically show up in cross-industry
deals—such as a manufacturing company purchasing a soft-
ware company.


Board of Directors
This is the hardest group of stakeholders to penetrate, and
the group with the highest degree of power. Regardless of
the approval of the executive stakeholders, the business unit,
and the corporate development team, the board of directors
will need to formally approve the transaction to continue.
     More often than not, this is a rubber stamp. The buyer
stakeholder group will need to socialize the deal before it is
formally up for a vote to ensure success. It is unrealistic to
expect you will have access to this sacred chamber of influ-
ence in the company.
     Large companies are protective of their board discussions.
These are closed-door meetings and have formal functions
other than advising the CEO. Just like a healthy board in a
startup, directors do not directly manage the business of the
company, but they are ultimately responsible for the manage-
ment of the corporation. They have the ultimate attention of
the CEO, as they have the power to remove that person from
their role.


82    //   E XIT RIGHT
  Most large companies disclose their board members on
their website. This is a relationship-building effort over a
long period of time. The best board members will give visibil-
ity to the strategic direction of the company, which, in turn,
allows you to build a strong rationale.
  This might sound outlandish, but never underestimate
the power you have as an up-and-coming startup in an indus-
try. Seasoned board members appreciate your insights as a
fresh perspective. Of course, you can learn from their expe-
rience over time, but the relationship is mutually beneficial.
Moreover, intentional relationships with board members
give you access to extremely warm introductions to the right
business unit, executive leader, or corporate development
team when the timing is right.
  Remember that this is a way to kick-start discussions. A
board member is not going to be making the executive deci-
sion to buy your company. Once the formal process begins,
avoid stepping outside your relationships to ensure they are
aligned on the direction. No board member can save a dam-
aged relationship with a CEO.
  With big enough mergers, large public shareholders will need
to approve the deals, along with the US government through
the Federal Trade Commission. The Hart-Scott-Rodino (HSR)
Act requires that parties to certain transactions—including
mergers and acquisitions, acquisitions of voting securities,
and assets and minority investments—file notifications with


                         W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   83
the Department of Justice Antitrust Division and the Federal
Trade Commission; they must also observe a statutory waiting
period if the transaction meets specified size-of-person and
size-of-transaction thresholds. This dollar amount is referred
to as the HSR threshold, and as of March 2021, the figure is
$92 million. If your deal is worth more than that, you will have
some additional paperwork to file.3
     In 2021, mega-acquisitions like Plaid by Visa were being
called off due to antitrust concerns. Facebook received a fed-
eral probe into its Instagram acquisition. Big Tech is under
scrutiny, just like Microsoft was in the nineties, for being too
powerful.
     These deals are well into billions, and both sides under-
stand that once they come to terms, this still doesn’t mean
a deal is going to happen. It’s also true that much reform
is needed in the evaluation process of these acquisitions.
Antitrust laws were not created for modern companies like
Instagram and Facebook.
     In 2019, Mark Zuckerberg defended the Instagram pur-
chase, and again in 2020, by attributing the mega success of
the acquisition to the unique resources Facebook gave to the
smaller company. He further boasted that this purchase was
reviewed and approved by state regulators at the time.
     Sarah Friar wrote in No Filter,4 an excellent book about
the story of Instagram’s journey, how the process was eval-
uated. When Facebook went public, the FTC kicked off


84    //   E XIT RIGHT
an investigation to first answer a simple question: were
Facebook and Instagram competing with each other? At the
time, Facebook just started its advertising business model,
and Instagram did not have a business model to begin with.
  The process began with the FTC inquiring what Facebook
thought of Instagram, and vice versa. However, this docu-
mentation was not collected by investigators. The lawyers
who worked on making the deal happen were now tasked
with finding evidence against the deal. The companies paid
them to investigate themselves.
  The firms did a thorough job and found documents that
hinted at competition. However, the same lawyers pointed
out that Facebook lived in a tough world: its very own cam-
era app had far fewer users than Instagram. They pointed out
plenty of companies with millions of users in the photo-shar-
ing-app world such as Path and PicPlz. They painted a picture
that showed Facebook was not the dominant force gobbling
up smaller companies; it was the underdog in the market.
  The regulators did not understand the winner-take-all
model of these internet businesses. Instagram had thirty
million users at the time of the acquisition. By the end of that
summer, it had nearly doubled. While the application looked
like anyone could copy it, the real value was the massive size
of the content library compared to new entrants.
  The FTC investigation that summer happened behind
closed doors, with no public report of its findings. Facebook


                          W HO AR E K E Y S TAK EHOLDER S?   //   85
highlighted that the process was robust, and when it was
all over, the regulators indicated that no further action was
needed.
     The evolution of the regulatory landscape will be fasci-
nating to follow in the upcoming years. It is likely that the
current Wild West will lend itself to a similar scrutiny in
industries such as oil, construction, or media.
     Similarly, the stakeholders that approve a FAIR exit agree-
ment will evolve as more deals are made with different kinds
of companies. While this may change the conversations you
have, both in content and frequency, there are a few truths
that will remain. You need to be as transparent and proactive
as possible. As the founder, it’s your responsibility to ensure
everyone feels comfortable and informed. Not only is it best
practice, but these habits could mean the difference of mil-
lions of dollars in your bank account.




86    //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R      5


WHAT DOES CORPORATE
DEVELOPMENT WANT
YOU TO KNOW?




D
      uring the research phase of this book, we
      met many executives from some of the largest tech-
      nology companies today: Twitter, Amazon, Facebook,
      Pinterest, Atlassian, and many others. Gary Johnson
stood out as the person who has seen it all.
  Gary’s journey with corporate development began at
Apple in the early 2000s. While he worked as a software
manager, he came to understand the power of acquisitions
and the role they played in every major product launch. In a
series of interviews, he reflected, “Without acquiring compa-
nies and their technologies, there is no way Apple could have
developed all of the in-house technical capacity to launch any
of the game-changing products of the twenty-first century.”
     After Apple, he spent a few years in the finance world
advising both private and public companies, and then signed
on to head the acquisition team at Facebook. There he was
involved in major deals from the time of Instagram through
Oculus, until he left to join Pinterest’s executive team as the
new Global Head of Corporate and Business Development.
     Gary was the first person to introduce us to his key ele-
ments of Alignment, Integration and Rationale (our humble
suggestion was to add Fit!). To him, corporate development
is like conducting an orchestra. He identifies the key oppor-
tunities, ensures that there is continuous alignment within
the organization, and takes the time to make the founders
feel at home in their new destination.
     He believes that the most important component of suc-
cessful corporate development is to understand that the real
work begins once the deal closes. As long as the objective is
sound and the teams trust each other, he doesn’t let small
issues escalate into major conflict.
     Most importantly, he designs integration with the found-
ers in the center of the process. A good corporate develop-
ment executive builds long-term relationships and becomes
an expert in the companies on the technology horizon.


88    //   E XIT RIGHT
   He sat with us for a series of interviews for this book. His
candor and wisdom are the backbone of the following chapter
as he expounded on the question, “What do you wish entre-
preneurs knew about M&A before they met you?”
   What we want to stress is that the executives who will be
spearheading and guiding the deal on the other side are not
working against you. And they are not the enemy. Rather,
they are simply looking to augment the value of the compa-
nies they represent and want to do that with the most tal-
ented, trustworthy entrepreneurs they can find. At best, they
will be your ambassador and guide throughout the journey.
At worst, they will kill transactions to protect the parent.
   Gary has done over $30 billion worth of deals, and he
would be the first to tell you M&A is the lifeblood of Silicon
Valley. The big players need you. And you have more power
than you think. Don’t expect perfect transparency from the
other side, and there are many parts of the process you are
not in control of. However, there are some things you can do
to make your life and your counterpart’s life easier.


BOTH PARTIES NEED TO LEAVE BAGGAGE
FROM PAST TRANSACTIONS BEHIND

There’s no getting around it: starting a serious dialog with
the corporate development team of a potential acquirer can
be fraught with uncertainty and doubt.


                             C OR P OR AT E DE V EL OP MEN T   //   89
     The questions that swirl in founders’ brains are intense
and overwhelming: What are they thinking on the other side
of the negotiating table? What are their goals? Are they try-
ing to take advantage of me? Do they know I’m nervous? Will
this be similar to my past trauma with our first attempt at
getting acquired?
     But you have to check those impulses, assume good inten-
tions, and most importantly, leave the baggage from past
transactions at the door.
     Founders shouldn’t bring their prior relationship expe-
rience to the beginning of the new one. If founders were
burned and mistreated in other transactions, close the book
on those folks and move on. As a founder, you are in the pat-
tern recognition business, so we understand how hard it may
be to move on from negative experiences in the past, but it is
critical to your future success.
     Chalk it up to a lack of FAIR elements in the last transac-
tion and move on. If anything, resilience will be a refreshing
perspective for the buyers to see in you. They do many more
deals than you and find it much easier to leave behind any
negative experiences. When they can recognize that same
attitude in you, they will feel an inherent level of trust that
you can lead, even through tough times.
     The truth is founders, like all people, crave certainty—and
an exit is a very uncertain process. Not only are you terrified
of making wrong decisions for a company you’ve dedicated


90    //   E XIT RIGHT
your life to, but you’re also worried about money, leadership,
and all the changes that come from a merger or acquisition.
Corporate development executives understand how you’re
feeling; they’ve seen it a million times.
   Good corporate development executives will allow you to
navigate these tensions without any judgment. However, as
an act of good faith, and because it’s what’s best for your own
well-being, do what you can to let go of any negative feelings
born from past events. Approach each new conversation as if
it’s your first one.


EXPAND YOUR CONTACT LIST

While your corporate development leader is most often
your main contact and point of communication, you should
not rely solely on them to be your champion. Your job is to
establish relationships—with the blessing and partnership
of your corporate development leader—with as many people
throughout the acquiring company as appropriate.
   You will need to gather important data about their busi-
ness, build a network of support to polish your rationale and
build alignment, and start to understand and mutually build
an integration plan.
   Hilary Shirazi was a corp dev leader at LinkedIn and
Zendesk before joining Pinterest as Head of Corporate
Development. Over a series of interviews, she gave us


                             C OR P OR AT E DE V EL OP MEN T   //   91
amazing access to her view on M&A from the acquirers’ side
of the table. One thing she emphasized was the importance
of expanding your network internally outside of your main
point of contact. “There’s no question that the more people
who know you and vouch for you inside the organization,
the better,” she continued. “When we are making our case,
and there are more heads nodding in recognition among our
internal stakeholders, that helps to grease the wheels.”


UNDERSTANDING THE DILIGENCE PROCESS: WHAT TO EXPECT

The goal of diligence is basically to answer three questions.
The first covers the product, tech, or data you’re offering—
your key asset. Simply put, they want to know if the IP is
really yours. Next, they want to look at the people you’re
leading. Can your team reach the goals the acquirer has for
their future? The answer here will determine the long-term
success of the potential deal. Finally, executives need to trust
that your customers will stick around. They are only inter-
ested in revenue they can predict will grow in the immediate
and long-term future.
     The diligence process for IP will likely begin with check-
ing your employee agreements for all staff and contractors to
ensure ownership. They will also evaluate your code to check
proprietary and open sources in case of potential IP infringe-
ment or cybersecurity flaws. Remember, larger companies are


92    //   E XIT RIGHT
open to significantly more legal risk than the small startup,
and a hint of a possible lawsuit can freeze a deal in its tracks.
   Diligence for your team will involve buyer representatives
from product and corporate development teams sitting down
with the engineers and other identified key individuals. They
are looking to get a read on the cultural fit between the two
parties, along with validating their strategic assumptions.
Understanding this can be a highly anxious process, found-
ers typically believe this is where the big company is coming
to get their “secret sauce.” Trust us. The last thing an M&A
team wants is to be accused of stealing! Remember that they
are looking for hints in general culture fit and alignment on
the future vision from the team in parallel. Hilary Shirazi
took pains to dispel this fear in our interview: “There is a mis-
conception that the big company is just going to change their
whole trajectory and steal your thing. But corporations are
well-oiled machines with long-term horizon planning. This
really shouldn’t keep founders up at night.”
   Sarah Hughes, the Director of Corporate Development at
Atlassian, echoed Hilary’s views. This was her first response
when asked, “What do you wish more founders knew?” She
said, “CEOs have been trained, mostly by VCs, to not share. I
want people to know that with very few exceptions (like spe-
cific tech IP), what corp dev is asking for does not constitute
trade secrets. It doesn’t serve you to hide information. Big
companies generally don’t steal stuff like crazy weirdos. They


                             C OR P OR AT E DE V EL OP MEN T   //   93
aren’t going to take that info and do anything. They have
long-term plans and agendas that take a lot more energy and
effort to steer in different directions.”
     As for the investigation into your customers, try not to
worry too much about this. Remember that the bigger com-
pany likely has many, many more customers than you do. The
goal of this diligence is not to take them away. They want to
validate that the product you created is solving a real prob-
lem for them. Depending on the quantity of customers, dil-
igence will look different, but they all have the same goal in
mind. They want to ensure long-term success for themselves,
but also for you and your team.
     As with everything else in this book, it’s best to prepare for
the diligence process as soon as possible. An organized due
diligence process is the result of a highly organized team. A
messy diligence process can kill deals. We’ve seen it happen.
The best approach is to stay prepared from the beginning.
Keep your house clean from day one, so that you’re not over-
whelmed or surprised in the critical diligence process.
     “Entrepreneurs need to run a tight ship,” said Chris Hecht,
Head of Corporate Development at Atlassian. “We’ve stopped
deals when the data room was incomplete.”
     A sloppy and incomplete data room can make you look
unprofessional, slow down the transaction to a crawl, and
rack up expensive lawyer fees as they chase down documents.
It can give key employees potential leverage over you at the


94    //   E XIT RIGHT
last minute, and signals to the acquirer that you either have
a weak management team or are not serious about the deal.
     Needless to say, you should have this ready before the pro-
cess begins instead of scrambling at the last minute.
     An introductory data room should include:

Financials     All up-to-date financial reports including audited
               statements and future projections.

Intellectual   A product deck, overview of IP, and any issued patents
Property       should be enough. Also be sure to include any prior patent
               or trademark infringement claims from outside parties
               (and how they were resolved). Nothing will kill a deal faster
               than a fuzzy view of who owns what.

HR             Make sure that all employees have signed employee
               agreements with IP assignments to the company, include all
               patent and trademark filings, and make sure that all outside
               contractors have signed clear waivers of IP ownership.
               Clear documentation of payroll should reflect no unusual
               payment setups for old employees or immigration issues.

Legal          The full and complete history of all corporate
               documentation, legal agreements, and board minutes. If
               there are past issues that you dealt with, they need to be
               articulated clearly.




HOW AND WHY TO ASK THE RIGHT QUESTIONS

Of course, as with investors, due diligence is a two-way street.
Corporate development professionals expect you to ask
questions of them with the same vigor as they investigate


                                   C OR P OR AT E DE V EL OP MEN T   //     95
your company. Asking questions makes a CEO appear more
sophisticated and more worthy of acquisition. Again, Hilary
Shirazi provides excellent insight: “The harder the questions
founders ask me, the more I know they are serious.”
     Further, larger companies have you at a disadvantage due
to experience with greater volumes of transactions and the
inherent information asymmetry that exists in the process.
Your job, at all times, is to know as much as you possibly can
about the acquiring company, their strategic objectives, their
decision-making process, and who the key players are and
what they care about. It is a daunting task.
     Dave Sobota, Head of Corporate Development at Instacart,
encourages entrepreneurs to be proactive in asking questions.
The more questions you ask and the more you understand,
the easier it will be to work in partnership with the acquiring
company to help them craft and justify the right purchas-
ing rationale to buy your company. You should be taking an
active hand in shaping your own destiny. He implores entre-
preneurs, “If corp dev isn’t explaining their reasoning or pro-
cess to you, you have to stop them and ask: Who is excited?
Should I get a banker? What happens next?”
     Some good examples of questions to ask that corporate
development should be happy to answer:


     • What is your rationale for wanting to buy our company?
     • What is the strategic hole you need to plug?


96    //   E XIT RIGHT
   • Are you feeling pressure from a competitor who is
      already addressing this problem?
   • Are your customers asking for this solution?
   • Which division will we reside in once we are acquired?
   • Who will be our new boss? Are they involved with this
      process? If not, how come?
   • How will you measure success post-transaction
      and what kind of budget/resources will we have to
      execute?
   • What is the decision-making process? Who has to
      approve?


  The answers to these questions will be obvious if the pro-
cess is FAIR. You are essentially drawing the outline of what
is going to be in the term sheet. For instance, if you don’t like
the price tag in the term sheet, point to the rationale and the
strategic value instead of complaining. Remember that your
startup is like a koi fish; it will grow to the size of the tank it
is put in. Understanding future resources gives you powerful
hints about how much you are really worth.
  Answers to questions can be found in lots of places. The
place to start is with corp dev, but savvy entrepreneurs won’t
stop there. In many tech companies, for example, the prod-
uct manager often has the final say. It is really important to
get to know them, and by doing so, you will make corporate
development’s life easier.


                              C OR P OR AT E DE V EL OP MEN T   //   97
     Who are the influencers? What do the industry analysts
think? What about the stock analysts? If the acquiring company
is a public company, an excellent source of information around
strategic priorities can be found by listening in on the public
earnings calls or reading their transcripts. With LinkedIn, it’s
pretty easy to track down former executives of that company
and you may be surprised what you will discover by reaching
out to them. And of course, don’t forget to talk to the CEOs of
companies that the acquiring company has bought in the past.
     Remember, knowledge is power. You can’t outsource this.
It’s your job to be seeking this out on an ongoing basis.


SUCCESS MEANS THAT THE DEAL IS FAIR FOR ALL PARTIES

Corporate development executives are graded on the relative
smoothness of the acquisition process and your subsequent
success at the parent company. This is where their interests
and incentives lie. The best among them are able to chaper-
one the future into existence with their judgment—and they
are rewarded handsomely for it.
     Gary Johnson took pains to stress that M&A is a
grounded, sober activity. It’s not about “bright shiny objects.”
They are always looking for Fit, Alignment, Integration, and
Rationale—this makes the job complex and difficult. Your
job is to work with your corp dev counterpart to help them
craft and perfect their FAIR story.


98    //   E XIT RIGHT
   Trust is the currency that makes it work.
   As we discussed earlier, trust is the lifeblood of M&A. It
takes time to build and it has to be earned with each and every
interaction. And it can be squandered in an instant with the
perception of a lie or misleading or exaggerated statements.
Never lie. Ever. Never make a claim that you can’t back up.
In the end they will find out and it will always come back to
bite you.
   Corporate development executives want you to know that
there are bad players out there. In the past, the company that
was known for bad practices was Microsoft in the nineties—
luring companies in with the prospects of an acquisition only
to walk away at the last second. Acquisition was used as a
weapon to take out competitors, and there are still compa-
nies that behave this way today.
   However, until proven otherwise, you are better off assum-
ing good intent. The reality is that most companies with bad
reputations have them for a reason, and a wise founder will
have the relationships in place to do back-channel checks. Truly
nasty behavior typically shows up in articles in the tech indus-
try, and the responsibility is on you to identify the bad partners.
   This is the real value of trust built over the long term. Bad
actors, more often than not, behave in those ways in a con-
sistent manner. Life is too short to do business with assholes,
and we recommend you stay away from those folks no matter
what the payout might look like.


                              C OR P OR AT E DE V EL OP MEN T   //   99
   Because trust is so important, corporate development will
understand if you want to keep the cards close to your chest
in certain parts of the process. Especially as the companies
are getting to know each other, it’s perfectly acceptable to say,
“We’re going to pass on answering that for now, and here’s
why.” This kind of communication builds trust and leads both
parties to a FAIR exit that is right for everyone. Certain parts
of your business will include trade secrets and IP that you
should protect at all costs. But don’t confuse protecting your
core IP with sharing the details the prospective buyer needs
to get the deal done.
   Remember that most due diligence is to confirm what the
buyer is assuming. Unless there is a reason for broken trust,
corporate development will push for diligence to be com-
pleted in a timely manner. They will have much more lever-
age internally to push for urgency than you will, so invest as
much trust as possible.
   As Stefan Williams, Head of Corporate Development at
Snowflake, told us, founders should “extend their vision
past what is possible today, and imagine a future with the
resources and leverage that a much larger company can bring.”
Remember that the acquisition is ultimately about the future,
supported by the credibility of your past actions.




100   //   E XIT RIGHT
P A R T        2




NEGOTIATING
THE RIGHT EXIT

Now that you’ve identified the correct fit for your com-
pany, ensured alignment, and understood and agreed to
the rationale, it’s time to get into the thick of it. Before
you can focus on successful integration, you have to
master the negotiation. Here is where you’ll be able to
see if you’ve planned the right exit for you and your team,
or if you need to find a more FAIR partnership.
   During this time, remember: negotiation begins way be-
fore an offer is made, and everything is up for negotiation.
   From carve-outs, escrows, earn-outs, compensation
packages, post-acquisition resources and, of course,
  the big brass knuckle ring of purchase price—there are
  seemingly endless terms to negotiate. It’s intense and
  overwhelming. The cauldron of stress is always threat-
  ening to boil over as founders find themselves on unfa-
  miliar new terrain.
      This is also the phase where more people come to the
  party—where bankers and lawyers can swoop in to add
  or subtract value.
      If you are lucky enough to entertain an offer for your
  startup, the chances are the negotiation phase is where
  the deal will fall apart. That’s the bad news.
      But since when have odds ever held an entrepreneur
  back?!
      “It’s so damn exciting when someone says they want
  to buy your company,” said Cliff Shaw, calling from his
  farmhouse in the south of France, where he now lives
  with his wife and daughter after successfully selling
  his startup Mocavo a few years ago. Cliff chalks up his
  last success to the fact that on his first two attempts, he
  made nearly every negotiation mistake in the book. He
  dedicated himself to learning from those mistakes and
  now regularly mentors other founders on how to navi-
  gate the exit. He shared his wisdom over the course of
  several Chicago-to-Provence chats.
      His advice, as well as our own stories, inform this
  next section.



102   //   E XIT RIGHT
   As we make our way through this messy middle phase,
we will break down the elements of a term sheet, the
closing documents, and all of the variables and termi-
nology founders need to know. We’ll talk about the best
way to manage a legal team, and how to work well with
your bankers. But before we dive deep into the technical
terms and the cast of characters, we first want to take a
high-level view to explore some general principles and
best practices.
   Maybe you’re a seasoned negotiator, maybe you’re
just a beginner. But even if you count yourself in the
ranks of the former, it’s likely that you haven’t sold more
than a few companies before. And selling your company
is a whole different ball game. You will likely be dealing
with M&A professionals on the other side of the table
who conduct dozens of transactions every year.
   No way around it, the odds are against you. The first
rule that applies across the board is that the acquirer
has done this more than you have. You are up against a
team of executives who make a living doing deals like
yours. There are rare moments of leverage in this nego-
tiation you are about to enter, and our goal is to identify
those points.
  This phase of an M&A transaction is an intense period
of negotiation. Not only for price, but for the future of
your company, your team, and your relationships.



                      NEGO T I AT ING T HE R IGH T E XI T   //   103
      Inexperienced founders may feel like they’ve lost the
  fight even before things kick off. But it’s crucial to adjust
  that mindset. Seasoned founders replace the “us versus
  them” mentality with one that treats acquirers as future
  partners and colleagues.
      So how do you go up against a better-funded, more
  sophisticated future partner? How do you navigate
  successfully so that the result of the transaction is that
  the buyer is stronger and more valuable than they were
  before? How do you make sure your own team is aligned
  and protected? We’ll tell you.




104   //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R       6


WHERE DO VALUATIONS
COME FROM?




W
          hen Facebook bought Instagram in 2012
          for a cool $1 billion, it was the “WTF?” heard
          around the startup world. Heads jerked up from
          Bloomberg terminals, analysts exchanged knowing
looks, and “Zuckerberg finally blew it” emails landed in inboxes
from Silicon Valley to Hong Kong.
   Business and tech journalists were flummoxed. At the time,
Instagram had just thirty million users, thirteen employees,
and $0 of revenue. Almost $1 billion in exchange for $0 of
revenue seemed like an odd trade, to say the least. Admittedly
an outlier—most acquired tech startups see price tags that
are nowhere near this vicinity—the acquisition highlights a
key principle of startup M&A.
  The purchase price of a tech startup can be influenced
by the amount of invested dollars, the previous valuations
of the company, lifetime value of each customer, credible
growth rates, etc. However, the only true price of a technol-
ogy company is what an acquirer is willing to pay for it.
  When members of the C-suite of an interested acquirer
come knocking on your door, they already have an invest-
ment thesis about what your company is going to do for
them; they are already oriented to future value. If you are
looking at buyers to proactively sell to, you have to make the
case for what that future value is. But either way, if you are
going to earn the maximum amount off of any deal, future
value is where it comes from. That doesn’t mean the past
isn’t important. Of course, you need growth and a history
of past performance that demonstrates value and credibility
towards your future plans.
  However, the most important part of a buyer’s deci-
sion-making process for the price they are willing to pay
comes down to the potential future value of the acquired
company within the larger corporation.




106   //   E XIT RIGHT
UNDERSTAND HOW THE ACQUIRING COMPANY THINKS
ABOUT FUTURE VALUE AND LEARN AS MUCH AS YOU CAN

You need to be aware of how different roles within a larger com-
pany will view the potential acquisition in order to successfully
position your company as valuable to the buyers. While some
(like CTOs and CFOs,) will often look only at the past perfor-
mance of your company, highlighting the potential risks, it
doesn’t mean that the deal is impossible. If the CEO and sales
leaders see something in your company that aligns with their
vision for the future, it’s your responsibility to help the others
see that too. Understand the terrain and play the game. CTO
and CFO objections can be overcome, but you have to under-
stand the acquiring company’s business case inside and out.
   At the time of the Instagram acquisition, most experts
derided Zuckerberg as inexperienced and foolhardy. With his
company on the verge of an IPO, he pulled valuable resources
to spend on what, at face value, was a nascent social network
that didn’t make any money.
   So, what did Zuckerberg see? Why was he so intent on get-
ting the deal done (his second attempt) that he personally
negotiated the terms with Instagram founder Kevin Systrom
while the legal teams waited and watched TV together? In
short, he saw the future.
   Since its acquisition in 2012, Instagram’s user base grew
to more than a billion users, and today accounts for a quarter


                   W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   107
of Facebook’s ad revenues: $20 billion a year as of 2019. To
put this in perspective, YouTube in the same year brought in
just over $15 billion. Today, Instagram’s value is estimated at
over $100 billion—it makes up a huge chunk of Facebook. All
shareholders made an outsized return. The founders became
influential executives within the parent company to steer
Instagram to newer heights. Most importantly, Facebook
instantly gained a massive competitive advantage and
increased its enterprise value by far greater than what it paid
for the app.
   According to the normal laws of business physics,
Instagram should not have been worth even a fraction
as much as their final purchase price. Systrom ultimately
understood what his company could achieve under the larger
umbrella of Facebook. This is why he reportedly asked for $2
billion in his initial bid!


UNCOVER STRATEGIC RATIONALE OF PROSPECTIVE
BUYERS, ESPECIALLY IF IT’S AN UNSOLICITED OFFER

It is incumbent upon you, the startup CEO, to learn as much
as you possibly can about the acquirer’s plan for your com-
pany. What are they actually buying? What sort of value will
the acquisition create for them in the future?
   This is a slingshot moment: one of the points of leverage
you have in the negotiation over valuation. If managed well,


108   //   E XIT RIGHT
the results can be phenomenal. But, as is common, founders
typically don’t scratch the surface hard enough to find out
what their startups are really worth to the other side. When
this happens, you leave money on the table.
   Troy Henikoff is a serial entrepreneur and well-known VC
in Chicago. He has invested in and mentored hundreds of
companies, first through his role as the Director of Techstars
Chicago and later as a partner with MATH Venture Partners
alongside Mark Achler and Dana Wright.
   But before any of this, in 1986 he was a first-time founder
with his company SSS, Specialized Systems and Software,
Inc., which he sold to Medline in 1992.
   At the time, Troy wasn’t planning on selling his company.
He and his team were happily building a profitable soft-
ware company with notable customers like Hyatt Hotels.
Troy initially pursued Medline as a potential customer as
well, and used the software they just built for Hyatt to build
credibility.
   In the middle of the sales presentation, then-CEO Jim
Mills cut in: “If you can build a purchasing system for
hotels, you can build a purchasing system for hospitals—
they are just like hotels, only the people don’t feel so well…”
Jim proceeded to make an offer to buy Troy’s company on
the spot.
  “I was totally caught off guard,” Troy said. “I had never even
thought about selling.” He respectfully declined and thought


                  W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   109
that would be the end of it. A few weeks later, Medline came
back with a higher offer price, only for Troy to say no again.
  After five or six attempts, the offer number got high
enough to catch Troy’s attention. A number, he thought
at the time, that was too big to refuse. As a young twenty-
something-year-old entrepreneur, it was the first time some-
one put a seven-figure value on his team’s work. It certainly
wouldn’t be the last!
  “Looking back, I realize that I did not know the full scope
of what Medline’s intention was with our software,” he
reflected. In fact, the company went on to use their now
proprietary SSS software to create a new business model
that yielded $125 million in annual revenue. A figure that
ended up being many times greater than the purchase price
of the company.
   Without experience or a clear understanding of his value
to Medline, Troy undervalued his own company. A price that
he thought he couldn’t refuse ultimately paled in comparison
to the true value he created for Medline.
   Imagine how Troy would have negotiated the deal if some-
one mistakenly forwarded an email to him about the future
plans for his technology within Medline. Your goal is to
understand the buyers’ business so well that you don’t have
to hope someone else makes a mistake and forwards you
their secrets.




110   //   E XIT RIGHT
THERE ARE MULTIPLE WAYS TO FIND
OUT THE STRATEGIC RATIONALE

As a founder, you don’t have to resort to luck or clairvoyance
to find clues to how the acquiring company is valuing your
key assets. All you have to do is ask open-ended questions on
strategy and shut up. Listening is the single biggest super-
power you have during a negotiation. Most will often do the
exact opposite and oversell their vision to the acquiring com-
pany. All that accomplishes is giving the buyers critical infor-
mation without learning anything new for your team to use
in the negotiation process.
  Your job is to understand what the buyer’s strategic objec-
tive is—regardless of whether they’re coming to you, or
you’re going to them. There are a number of nonthreatening
questions that founders can ask during the negotiation pro-
cess to uncover the joint value that you can create:


   • What is the long-term objective?
   • What amount of funding will be made available after
     the acquisition? To accomplish what?
   • What will integration look like?
   • When will your finance and HR teams enter the
     conversation?
   • What does success look like for you?
   • What is the cost of not doing a deal today?


                  W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   111
   • What are the threats keeping the CEO up at night?
   • What will the new org chart/reporting structure
      look like?
   • How will this acquisition impact the current or future
      share price of the company?


   The more freely and openly they answer these questions,
the more you can verify their intent. If they can’t (or won’t)
provide answers or they engage in evasive tactics, these are sig-
nals that indicate they are far from being able to close the deal.
   The bottom line is, don’t fall in love with the deal. The truth
is, once a deal starts to get some momentum, it’s basic human
nature—and the personality trait of all driven type A people—
to drive for success and closure. Don’t succumb to the dark
side of your eagerness to find closure. Remember that many
deals fail. Strive to be as objective as you possibly can be. If an
answer doesn’t jibe for whatever reason, slow down and care-
fully, methodically think it through. The most powerful tool
you have in any negotiation is the power to say no.
   It is also your job to figure out where the pressure points
are in the acquiring CEO’s orbit. Who are the stakeholders
that influence a CEO’s strategic priorities the most? After
identifying them, you should tailor your strategy accordingly.
Start by thinking about the following stakeholders: board
members, activist shareholders, former executives, channel
partners, and analysts.


112   //   E XIT RIGHT
  Remember that most of what the buyer is paying for is the
future value of your efforts. The best price is the one both
parties feel is fair and sets up the long-term partnership to
succeed. Too high a price, and expectations for return will
be unreasonable. Too low and it is unlikely that appropriate
resources are allocated for success.


IDENTIFY YOUR MOST IMPORTANT ASSET:
TEAM, IP, SALES, TAX-LOSS CARRY FORWARD, ETC.

We’ve established that high valuations are the result of buy-
ers pricing for the future value of a startup integrated into
their larger business engine. But how exactly are they deter-
mining that value? What exactly are they buying? Part of
knowing how to analyze your future value to an acquiring
entity is understanding what your main strategic asset is.
  The assets of your company can be broken down into
familiar key areas: team, leadership, market, growth, tech-
nology, and profitability.
   Some companies are acquired for the future potential of
their proprietary technology. Some are acquired based on
a multiple of trailing top-line revenues. And some financial
buyers are simply looking for a multiple of EBITDA.
  The information you gather in these early stages of nego-
tiation to understand how to best position your company to
cocreate immense future value will also help uncover which


                  W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   113
of these strategic assets will be most valued by the acquirer.
While the acquisition is for all of the assets of the company,
it is very likely that your acquirer cares way more about one
of those things above all else. Knowing this insight is a huge
indicator of where the future value lies.
  Don Loeb is the former lead of M&A for Techstars, the
elite international technology accelerator. He has advised
hundreds of startups going through this process. He stresses
that most founders in the technology space are looking at
acquisitions that are below $100 million. These sub $100
million exits are often not the ones that are splashed across
front pages or shouted from the rooftops. They may only
return 2x or 3x for their investors.
  When we asked him what was the one thing he wished that
founders knew, he didn’t hesitate for a moment. But what
was surprising about his answer is that he said it’s something
that not only founders, but also acquiring companies, over-
look too often.
  “For the majority of these ‘smaller’ acquisitions in technol-
ogy, the code base isn’t worth much of anything (with few
exceptions) without the team as well. It’s the people with whom
you grinded it out and did the nearly impossible with; creating
value from a totally new organization and technology where
there was none before. That’s where the value is,” he explained.
  Again, it comes down to positioning yourself with your
potential acquirer for the highest degree of shared value that


114   //   E XIT RIGHT
can be created together. Understanding where your strate-
gic value advantage lies in the eyes of the acquirer is also
important so that you can position those assets in the best
possible light.
   Simply put, buyers do not want future headaches. And
they will zero in on any reason to say no to the deal. If the
buyer is interested in a high-functioning creative team that
produces amazing products, make sure you take care of any
HR issues. If the IP is the big draw, make sure that any and
all legal filings are completely squared away. Any perceived
employee or IP liability can, and most likely will, come back
to bite you later in the process.


SHUTTING DOWN FISHING EXPEDITIONS

Not every offer is a serious one! It’s your job as the CEO to
snuff out solicitations without real interest behind them.
David Cohen from Techstars has direct advice for CEOs who
want to distinguish real interest from a waste of time. His
simple advice is to ask for the ballpark offer right after engag-
ing them.
  At this point, the rule of thumb is simply sharing infor-
mation on your company that you are comfortable sharing
with a future investor. In other words, the information you
can share without an NDA. He says, “You can expect ques-
tions about revenues, expenses, head count, conversion rates,


                  W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   115
attrition rates, and all sorts of detailed stuff. Without men-
tioning an NDA, provide a few high-level answers that you’re
comfortable with them knowing and when the questions get
into the ‘zone of discomfort,’ ask them to provide a detailed
list of their questions via email so that you can work on them.”
  After the initial questions are answered, you should ask
for the ballpark offer. Now that you’ve answered just a few
high-level questions and have a more detailed list of what
they’re after, it’s important to have a price on the table before
proceeding, even if it is a range.
  The hard part is to choose your words wisely—you can’t
be too interested or not interested enough. David shares
the following words of wisdom to help the CEOs he works
with: “Explain that you’ve received their email, you’re obvi-
ously flattered with their interest, and that you’re happy to
answer all of their questions under two conditions. The first
condition is that you’d like all of the information that they
requested to be covered by an NDA. The second condition is
that before proceeding, you would like for them to provide
the likely “ballpark” parameters of the acquisition via a sim-
ple email, including the likely cash/stock split.”
   Most acquirers will happily accept the first condition
(not doing so is a serious red flag) but will avoid the second
condition. But it’s important to stand firm on both before
proceeding. The acquirer will likely claim that they don’t
have enough information to make an offer, and that they


116   //   E XIT RIGHT
need their questions answered. Assuming that you’ve given
them basic revenue and expense figures, this is a bluff. Hold
firm. Explain that you’re very busy working with custom-
ers and improving your product, and that you can’t afford
to distract the company without having at least a ballpark
understanding of the offer. Explain that it’s obviously non-
binding and that you won’t hold them to it, but that you’re
just trying to determine whether you should discuss this
with your board.
   Sometimes there is a little dance at this stage, where they
will look for a couple more tidbits of information in order to
give this ballpark offer. That’s fine—use your best judgment.
This is your leverage to get the ballpark offer, so don’t give it
away. Recognize that the NDA won’t protect you from giving
the “fake acquirer” exactly what they wanted.
   If the acquirer resists the NDA or the ballpark offer, they’re
probably just fishing. You’re not being difficult. You’re asking
a perfectly reasonable question about ballpark deal terms
before wasting your time.
   People who are not high up enough in the acquiring com-
pany to actually be making this offer will be scared off at this
point. That’s a good thing. Perhaps they never had permis-
sion to be pursuing an acquisition in the first place. This tech-
nique weeds those people out since they have to provide the
nonbinding ballpark offer in writing via email.




                   W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   117
TYPE OF ACQUIRER IMPACTS VALUATION

Setting your expectations is the first step to negotiating a
FAIR exit that is right for everyone. Accurately setting your
expectations starts with understanding the type of acquirer
you are dealing with. In Part 1, we explored all the different
ways you can be set up to make smart decisions years before
entertaining acquisitions offers. Understanding the strategy
around who your likely acquirers are and baking in those
expectations up front is certainly part of the planning work
to be done before you reach the negotiating table.
  But there is a notorious Yiddish adage, “Mann tracht, un
Gott lacht,” meaning “Man plans, and God laughs.” Future
planning is critical, but once you decide to sell, you have to
stay nimble and flexible. If Facebook was your golden target
but you have to pivot to other options, make sure you have a
handle on how to adjust your valuation expectations.
  There are the Big Five, those Silicon Valley giants dubbed
with the intentionally intimidating moniker, FAANG. This
is of course Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix, and Google
(Alphabet). You can also add companies like Microsoft,
Adobe, Oracle, and SoftBank to this list. These companies
view acquisition as an innovation R&D pipeline. They are set
up with highly professional operations who scout, negotiate,
and integrate teams and technology into their larger engines
dozens of times throughout the year. These are your all-star


118   //   E XIT RIGHT
acquirers who pay the big 10x tech multiples of every inves-
tor’s dream.
   In terms of valuations, a tier below these Big Five are the
strategic buyers within your industry, followed by PE and
other financial buyers. Each of these tiers may or may not
be realistic for you to consider, but it’s worth evaluating all
your possibilities—especially to avoid ending up like Troy
and undervaluing your company!
  Ask yourself, does the potential buyer make a lot of acqui-
sitions or very few? Is it their first one? Are they a public com-
pany with transparent financial records or a private entity?
   It might be true that your mom thinks your company
should sell for $500 million, but if you’re looking at a set
of potential acquirers who don’t play ball in that size sta-
dium, you’re going to be off the mark. The trick is to temper
optimism with realistic expectations. If you are expecting a
huge tech multiple from a conservative industry competitor,
you’re going to be heading into the negotiation already start-
ing with an insurmountable gap.
  After you’ve gathered as much information as possible, you
should have an understanding of your value, what is possible
for you in terms of partnerships, and the kind of buyer you
want to work with. From there, it’s time to agree on the details.
   It’s time to fill out a term sheet, the most important docu-
ment in the whole process. Just like how founders shouldn’t
proceed without a price range over an email earlier in the


                  W HER E DO VAL U AT IONS C OME FR OM?   //   119
process, at this point David Cohen insists that founders
should not proceed without a term sheet. He writes that “even
at this stage, many acquirers will go silent for a long period of
time. Sometimes this is normal—these things just take time.
Keep building your business in the meantime, and continu-
ally push for a term sheet fully describing the acquisition.”
   Now let’s talk about what’s inside a term sheet.




120   //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R       7


WHAT IS A
TERM SHEET?
                               5




G
      etting to the term sheet is a real milestone.
      Most acquisition discussions don’t make it to the stage
      where a nonbinding term sheet is signed. There will be
      lots of discussions over the years to build up a strong
rationale that justifies a price both sides are happy with. If
this is a FAIR deal, prior to a written offer you should have
had verbal alignment on the vision for the future, the time-
line to close, and most importantly, the final price.
  Take a deep breath here. There are many highs and lows in
the startup journey, but this is a special one. No matter how
you view it, it will be emotional to see a piece of paper that
has the potential to create generational wealth. It’s OK to be
excited, nervous, scared, or determined—we felt all those
feelings too.
   Despite the verbal promises you’ve already secured, noth-
ing is real until things are written down. This is the phase
when negotiating the particulars of the term sheet kicks
into high gear. In order to negotiate well, we first need to
learn more about what each of the terms means, what can
and should be negotiated, and which points are not worth
pushing back on.
   When you receive the term sheet, especially if this is your
first time, you are going to be experiencing wildly divergent
emotions. Both elation and fear. The goal of this chapter is to
arm you with knowledge so that when you sit down with your
attorney, you will have a good foundational knowledge of what
the terms mean and what is important. Ultimately, you, as the
leader, need to give your attorney the right directions for what
to focus on, and what not to squander time arguing about.
  The term sheet is by far the most important document in
the whole transaction, and it is wise to treat it as such. It out-
lines the key terms of the deal, and done right, will become
the foundation for a smooth process down the road. Signing
the term sheet doesn’t mean you will close the final deal—it
is usually nonbinding. However, it is the point of no return
as it likely will commit you to negotiating exclusively with
one party.


122   //   E XIT RIGHT
   We know the feeling well. It is pure bliss to receive any
document that says your startup is worth millions of dollars.
The euphoria that comes from that tends to make founders
overlook the rest of the document. The term sheet includes
a LOT more than the final price in question. Here is an over-
view of what you should expect to find in a term sheet:


  1. Price
       a. Calculation
       b. Front-end adjustments
       c. Back-end adjustments
  2. Closing conditions and timeline
       a. Necessary approvals
       b. Due diligence checklist
       c. Exclusivity and expiration date
  3. Personnel agreements
       a. Organizational structure
       b. Governance
       c. Retention tools


THE FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LETTERS OF
INTEREST (LOI), TERM SHEETS, AND CLOSING DOCUMENTS

An ideal term sheet sets the stage for the whole process of an
exit. A letter of interest is simply a weaker term sheet with way
fewer details, usually only indicating a loose timeline and price.


                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   123
The closing documents are outlined in the term sheet, and they
get drafted once the term sheet is signed by both parties.
   While the M&A term sheet looks similar to a financing
term sheet, what’s inside is completely different. For the
definitive breakdown of a VC financing term sheet, we rec-
ommend Brad Feld and Jason Mendelson’s excellent book
that has stood the test of time, Venture Deals.6
  The M&A term sheet packs a punch in terms of the amount
of detail in it and you should want it to—this is how you get
full visibility into the material terms of your deal. Generally
speaking, there should be no surprises, good or bad. Most
often, the buyer will schedule a call in advance to walk
through the key points and confirm that everyone agrees. It’s
a practice that solidifies trust for both sides. Needless to say,
founders should never sign a term sheet they don’t intend to
finalize with closing documents. A signed term sheet means
all the focus now turns to reflecting the agreed-upon terms
to binding closing documents. If the deal falls apart after-
wards, bridges are burned.
  As a buyer, Gary Johnson always anticipates which parts
of the term sheet the founders won’t like. He is a huge pro-
ponent of transparency and understands that the perception
of a surprising negative term is likely a lot worse than what it
actually means. More importantly, he believes that explain-
ing why a term needs to be in there ahead of time helps
founders get rid of this terrible feeling: am I getting screwed?


124   //   E XIT RIGHT
   In 2019, Atlassian made a bold, unprecedented move for a
seasoned acquirer. They published their standard M&A term
sheet publicly and, in doing so, shared with the world what
mattered to them most and, most importantly, why it mat-
tered. (You can still see the term sheet itself if you search for
the Atlassian term sheet.) Their efforts towards transparency
should be highlighted and followed for everyone making an
acquisition in the future.
   Unfortunately, there is no standard set of documents com-
panies use for acquisitions, since every situation, company,
and strategic rationale for doing the deal is different. Picking
one apart isn’t necessarily going to help the majority of the
situations you can find yourself in, but it is worth familiariz-
ing yourself with the general outline of information.
   Instead of publishing a term sheet, we decided it would be
much more helpful to share a framework of terms and ques-
tions you should familiarize yourself with before accepting
your first term sheet. Our goal is to be as generic as possible
here so that you can apply the details of your exact situation
when the time comes. Then, the more details the term sheet
can include, the better.
   Remember, as time goes on, the ability to negotiate dwin-
dles and the pressure to close increases with each passing day.
The negative feelings that accompany any concession can
tank the deal as a whole. Not to mention that changes after
the term-sheet stage are not cheap. Once you are into due


                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   125
diligence and the drafting of definitive agreements, the legal
bills increase exponentially for any modification. Our recom-
mendation is to negotiate the term sheet in earnest, and as
long as the terms are FAIR, sign it with the intention of clos-
ing the deal. In this stage, there are three main components
in the term sheet you should pay attention to: price calcu-
lation, certainty to close, and personnel agreements. Here’s
what you need to know about each of them.


THE HOLY TRINITY OF M&A TERM SHEETS:
PRICE CALCULATION, CERTAINTY TO CLOSE,
AND PERSONNEL AGREEMENTS

Entrepreneurs should use these three buckets as a mental
framework to define what matters to them: price, certainty,
and personnel. Signing a term sheet and going into exclu-
sivity with one party means you are foregoing the option
to remain independent, raise additional capital, or evaluate
other buyers. The details need to make sense!
  The worst term sheets are skinny letters of interest—they
only indicate price, or worse, a price range in consideration for
the purchase. This is rarely the starting point of a FAIR deal.
The buyer should have already discussed the rationale, inte-
gration plans, and internal alignment needs with the seller;
therefore, there should be no issues putting down the import-
ant points that frame your deal. Remember that whoever


126   //   E XIT RIGHT
drafts the final documents (most often the buyer) sets the
terms. You have maximum negotiating leverage before you
sign the term sheet. What’s not inside this document is likely
going to be buyer-favorable in the closing documents.
  Typically, the term sheet will be accompanied by a cover
letter with a few paragraphs on the rationale for the acqui-
sition. This is as important as the document itself because it
confirms the document was drafted with the ultimate objec-
tive: to actualize the goals embedded in that rationale. This is
the moment that will prove that the buyer has thought care-
fully about the deal and that negotiating will be done in good
faith. After all, the shared objective belongs to both parties,
and both of you should be motivated to make that happen.
  The first thing anyone wants to find out is price. Let’s dig in.


Price Calculation
This is always a surprise for less experienced founders; the
common-sense approach is to expect a simple number: “We
are buying your startup for $100 million!” If only it were
that simple!
  The purchase price is never just a number; it is always
accompanied by details around the adjustments and tax
implications. For instance, when your startup is acquired,
you will likely have some amount of cash in the bank. What
happens to that money? Does the acquirer “refund” the
money by increasing the purchase price accordingly?


                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   127
  The first part of understanding price is to understand how
proposed figures are calculated.


Point price versus a range: There is a huge distinction
between companies acquired by a flat number versus pur-
chases where a price range is defined with a formula to cal-
culate the specifics. The first is easy: we are buying you for
$X. This then becomes the starting point for the rest of the
document.
  The alternative is used for companies where the value
increases in time. For instance, a company growing 10 per-
cent month after month will double its customer base in
a year. In such a fast-paced environment, the price can be
defined as a range depending on certain milestones—such as
a multiple of revenue on closing date. This is simply a cop-out
on the part of the buyer; all it says is that the buyer hasn’t
completed the due diligence in full to commit to a price.
  Our preference is that the number should be a point price
at the high end of the value of the strategic rationale of the
deal. This makes everything simpler and maximizes the
return for all shareholders.
  To avoid confusion, this is different from an earn-out
scenario. An earn-out is similar to paying in installments; it
means that the buyer is committing to future payments to
shareholders if certain conditions are met. This is commonly
reflected as a fixed price plus an earn-out based on a formula.


128   //   E XIT RIGHT
This usually happens if there is a difference of opinion on the
current value of the startup—an earn-out can bridge the gap
between the buyer and the seller.


Cash versus stock mix: Cash is exactly what it sounds like,
a huge sum of money sent via wire transactions by a paying
agent. However, public companies can offer to pay for the
company in the form of their publicly traded stock. If the
markets like the transaction, this will drive the company
stock price up, essentially paying for the whole acquisition in
certain instances.
   There are two ways of pricing stock in a deal—(i) fixed
ratio (you get X shares, fixed when we sign) or (ii) fixed price
(you get $X worth of shares at close; the number is deter-
mined based on the buyer’s closing price). The distinction is
important as you are much more prone to the market recep-
tion of the deal in the first instance (fixed ratio) and the sec-
ond protects you from the market reaction, assuming the
deal is announced at signing (as most are).
   This also aligns all parties in working to drive up the value
of the company. Essentially, all new employees have their
net worth tied to the buying company for a certain “lockup”
period where they aren’t allowed to sell. That can be annoy-
ing for sure, but imagine the awesome feeling if the stock
price doubles in the period you worked tirelessly to make the
acquisition a success!


                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   129
   Of course, it works exactly the reverse way as well. If you
don’t evaluate your buyer correctly, the millions of dollars
the company is sold for can evaporate into thin air during the
period you aren’t allowed to sell your shares. Mark experi-
enced this personally when his first company, the Whitewater
Group, was acquired by Symantec. At first, things seemed
great—when the deal closed, Symantec stock was trading at
forty-eight dollars per share. All he had to do was wait ninety
days as part of the lockup period.
   Unfortunately, in that period a scandal broke, indicating
that the CEO of Symantec might have committed a crime.
In front of his eyes, the stock price tumbled to six dollars
per share when the lockup period was over. It was painful
and taught him a valuable lesson about not counting money
before the deal is completely closed. As often as possible,
stick to cash if you aren’t absolutely willing to take risks.


Valuing buyer stock: This is another important detail in
pricing because a public stock price is never a fixed number.
Typically, a weighted average of the last ten to twenty days is
used to determine the share price at the time of closing.
   However, all bets are off if the buyer is a privately traded
company. This is where negotiation takes over. The buyer
will argue that the stock should be priced at their latest
round, a premium on the latest round, or even a future val-
uation at which the company will eventually go public. The


130   //   E XIT RIGHT
seller will argue that the price should be determined by the
fundamentals of the company today. This is really hard to
get right, and the winners and the losers are separated by a
mile. Getting acquired by a company like Google, Facebook,
or Twitter in their early days, where a secondary market
already existed, was at least more helpful. These compa-
nies were so valuable before going public—with valuations
well into the billions—that there were whole marketplaces
for investors to buy these stock options. However, what if
Theranos was making the offer? Their public fall from grace
would mean that the proceeds from the sale also get deci-
mated in value. This isn’t so far from the truth: just a few
weeks before WeWork’s very public fall from grace, they
were in serious acquisition talks and had already bought a
number of companies using their stock.
  Ask yourself this: Do you see yourself working to make
this private company as successful as possible? For the CEO
who is making the decision to invest in you? Ultimately, the
belief in the value of a private company is tied to the belief in
the mission and the talent of the people pursuing that mis-
sion. If something in the stock offer doesn’t feel FAIR, call
off the deal altogether instead of negotiating the amount.
Remember, you are effectively “investing” the value of your
company into theirs, much like a VC would invest cash.
   Finally, pay extra attention to when the stock is priced
to determine how many shares will be used to purchase the


                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   131
company. For long-standing, public companies, this isn’t so
much of an issue. It’s the younger, more volatile companies
where the number can fluctuate wildly, as well as in situa-
tions like the crash of 2008, where the bottom of the market
seemed to fall out.
  This is a good place to use the analysts from your invest-
ment banking team to run a few scenarios.


Tax treatment: If stock, is it “tax deferred”? This is a massive
point to highlight, especially for you and your team mem-
bers. Unless structured properly, the stock component that
you receive in a deal may be taxable to you. That means that
whether or not you receive any cash in the deal, you’d have
to fork over to the IRS the amount of tax on the gain repre-
sented by the stock portion (and any cash portion) of your
deal! This can have a serious effect on what you actually take
home when it’s all said and done.
   Make sure you understand the tax implications of stock
payments. For cash deals, this is much simpler.


Earn-outs: In addition to the retention incentives to employ-
ees of the startup, buyers may offer future payments if certain
milestones are met. It’s extremely important to understand
the conditions around these payments. Timeline and mile-
stones are the two key components. What objective needs to
be achieved in what period in order to receive earn-outs?


132   //   E XIT RIGHT
  The most common milestone is an increase in revenue,
typically calculated with GAAP principles. However, we have
seen other metrics make their way into this calculation, such
as EBITDA, FDA approvals, or technical integration of exist-
ing platforms. The most important component is to make
sure you understand what you are signing up for. Avoid peo-
ple- and retention-based milestones. Most often, these terms
are useless and set up the company for the wrong incentives.
Ultimately, the buyer is in charge post-closing and can have
extreme impacts on both retention and people. Remember
that objectives like EBITDA will be much harder to predict
and control once the documents are signed. After all, it is
the acquiring company’s accountants who determine how
expenses are allocated, and that can tank an EBITDA easily.


Understanding share price calculation: How much will each
share be worth?
  Once the dust settles and there is a final price on the com-
pany, the way you will determine who makes how much is
simple. Divide the full purchase price by the total number of
shares, and you get a price per share. Multiply the number of
shares you own by the share price, and you are all set.
  However, you must understand what is on your capitaliza-
tion table and what is included in your total number of shares.
For instance, technology startups typically have an employee
retention pool of shares. These belong to no one until they


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   133
are awarded as an incentive. What happens to those groups
of “unassigned” shares? This can be as much as 5–10 percent
of the whole price! You can argue that those shares should
be left out of the calculation of the price per share—this can
move the dial significantly.
   You should also pay attention to how the per-share price
is calculated and make sure it is done in accordance with the
“treasury method.” Put simply, this has to do with how options
are treated in the deal. Commonly, they will be “cashed out”
based on the net spread between the per-share price in the
deal and the exercise price so that option holders don’t need
to reach into their pockets to pay the exercise price. However,
if you don’t add the aggregate amount of those exercise prices
to the deal price to come up with a notional per-share price
(to take into account that the buyer will pay less for an option
than it will for an actual share), the buyer ends up paying less
than the headline valuation in the deal. This aggregate exer-
cise price can be in the millions, so it’s worth clarifying this
point with your legal team!


Front-End Price Adjustments
By now, we hopefully have a number to work with. The next
exercise is to agree on the conditions where that number
will be adjusted. Don’t think of this as a renegotiation of the
deal; there are simply not enough known details about your
startup to work into the price.


134   //   E XIT RIGHT
Debt: This is a downward adjustment of price. It is there to
prevent behavior like borrowing a million dollars the day
before the close and passing on that obligation to the buyer.
Sometimes debt is in the form of a convertible note from a
past raise; it can also be a bank loan against receivables. Be
careful to avoid loose definitions of debt here; buyers can
include things like the operating lease of the offices in this
area, so ask for clarification to avoid surprises down the road.
Remember that since the convertible debt likely converts at
a sale, you need to double-check the terms beforehand. This
will impact the purchase price in a material way.


Cash: Simple enough—usually the cash in the bank at the
time of closing increases the purchase price by the same
amount. (As a side note, this is another reason to run a prof-
itable business!) However, this is not always the case and
buyers can request to keep the cash, or might argue that off-
shore or restricted cash needs to be treated separately.


Working capital adjustment: Most startups need a mini-
mum amount of working capital to keep running their oper-
ations. The spirit of the term is to avoid situations where the
buyer immediately needs to infuse cash in the business after
the close. This would effectively adjust the purchase price, and
the goal is to avoid surprises once again. Conversely, if the
target’s trajectory is good and perhaps there are some nice


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   135
customer deals on the horizon, a working capital adjustment
could act to increase the price paid. Be mindful of whether
the adjustment is only one way down (in favor of the buyer),
or a two-way adjustment.
  This is potentially big, as it can include terms like deferred
revenue adjustment. It is not material for every business, but
if you are running a large-enterprise, SaaS business with long
implementation cycles, you might have millions in deferred
revenue from accounts waiting to go live with their purchases.
   Finally, you must pay attention to the timing of working
capital adjustment. It is unlikely that the financials will be
official on the day of closing—this typically takes sixty to
ninety days. In certain cases, both sides can agree on esti-
mates and course correct afterwards—this is called a two-
part adjustment.


Transaction expenses: These are all of your expenses related
to the closing; typical items are legal and investment banker
fees. However, you might have to clarify items like dou-
ble-trigger severances, stock acceleration for certain employ-
ees, or payroll taxes.
   It is always a good idea to double-check the thought pro-
cess behind these adjustments. Buyers acting in bad faith
might view these tools as ways to reduce price later in the
process. That might work for one deal, but over the long term,
it ruins the reputation of buyers from a FAIR standpoint.


136   //   E XIT RIGHT
Back-End Price Adjustments
Even when the price is agreed upon for the day of closing, we
are far from being done with the final number. Fair warning,
this is a really complex part of the term sheet, and you will
want to go over it with your lawyer twice.
  These are the clauses that last for years after closing and
can impact the purchase price to the point of clawbacks from
sellers (in extreme situations). Think of this as insurance on
the deal. It’s a minor expense if nothing goes wrong, but in
the event of catastrophe, the adjustment can be massive.


Escrow: This is where you define how much of the deal is
at stake if any of the promises were broken. Think of it as
extremely expensive insurance; typically 10–20 percent of
deals are held back for twelve to twenty-four months. The
riskier the acquisition, the higher the amount and the longer
the period. In the research phase of this book, we saw ranges
all the way from 5–25 percent, so this is a point of negotia-
tion and FAIR deals will benefit tremendously. The elements
in a FAIR deal reduce risk by design.
  Pay extra attention to deals where your equity revests; this
means that the buyer is using the share of your proceeds as
a tool to retain you. There may be tax implications, and you
have to double-check what you are actually going to get paid
on the day of closing, after taking all of these deductions and
holdbacks into account.


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   137
Indemnification: If the escrow is the amount of money in
the insurance policy, think of indemnification as the condi-
tions for the payment: it simply states the promises you are
making and who is responsible for the bill if they are broken.
  You are effectively giving a backstop to the representa-
tions you are making, such as the correctness of the payout
spreadsheet, existing litigation, and pre-closing taxes owed.
There are a whole host of adjustments that can come back to
haunt you, sometimes with strange terms, such as liabilities
using open-source code or export controls around violating
any sanctions. Each of these representations and warranties
(promises you are making) has a different survival period and
can come back to haunt the shareholders.
   For instance, a heavily negotiated item here is indemnifica-
tion from IP matters. The buyers will want all of the risk to be
absorbed by the shareholders; if the company is infringing on
any IP and gets sued for it, the payment held in escrow can be
used for legal bills. The sellers will argue that all IP (known or
unknown) infringement is too broad, and it is virtually impos-
sible to “prove” that the company isn’t infringing on any IP. All
items that go in the indemnification section should be clearly
outlined and negotiated, with the grand assumption that the
due diligence is wrapped up with no issues. If there are specific
concerns or liabilities discovered in the due diligence process,
those will be directly deducted from the purchase price, or the
buyer will amend the indemnification to include them.


138   //   E XIT RIGHT
Survival period: This is important as this is how long your
obligations will hang out there for. Most of the general repre-
sentations on the company will be for twelve to twenty-four
months, since buyers will want to go through at least one audit
cycle. Coverage on items like intellectual property can easily
extend from eighteen to thirty-six months, and fundamental
representations survive for much longer, often six to ten years.


Fundamental representations: These will be much more
carefully defined, but understand that things like cap table
management or issues with problem shareholders will (and
should) be your responsibility for a long period of time.
For instance, if the CEO has exceeded his or her authority
by signing the deal without the consent of the board or the
shareholders, the buyer will expect to be protected against
the fallout. As long as the process was FAIR, this is usually
not something you need to worry about.


Liability cap: This is exactly what it sounds like: the maxi-
mum amount of exposure for the sellers if things go wrong.
This is typically just the escrow amount for general represen-
tation breaches. In specific cases like intellectual property
breaches, it can be more than the escrow.
   Taxes and fundamental representations go to the full pur-
chase price, and if you committed fraud, the sellers would
have the right to ask for their money back (and potentially


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   139
more!). There is a much higher bar to prove wrongdoing, but
an uncapped liability means that the buyer can come after
shareholders—including you—for damages. These caps are
highly technical in how they work together with the escrow
amount, and you should clarify hypotheticals with the M&A
team while going over the term sheet.


Baskets: Given how comprehensive indemnity provisions
can be, this language is used to protect all parties from every
small issue becoming a legal matter. Think of this as a sort
of “deductible” on your insurance policy: a threshold under
which claims are deemed too small to deal with. The basket
can be for individual claims, or a combined aggregate where
claims add up to a certain amount before they are addressed.
These range from 0.25 to 1 percent of the purchase price.


NET OPERATING LOSSES (NOLS)

This is another area where seasoned founders who understand
their businesses in their entirety can have an edge. NOLs
are simple—you have likely been operating your company
unprofitably for a number of years, accumulating a bunch of
losses along the way. This is essentially taxable income, and
late-stage companies can use a portion of your losses imme-
diately as a tax write-off. (We are assuming that your buyer is
likely a profitable company that pays income tax.)


140   //   E XIT RIGHT
   There is a complicated accounting study to determine how
much can be used, but for startups who have raised signif-
icant capital, this number can be a material increase to the
final price.
   Our recommendation is to leave this point to assess sep-
arately. NOLs can be significant, so you don’t want to be
“guaranteeing” them as part of the indemnification obliga-
tions we talked about earlier. However, if they are valuable
to the buyer, then you may have an opportunity to negotiate
additional value for them. Either way, it’s a complex analysis
and nuanced point to negotiate, so you need the thoughtful
guidance of your lawyers here.


DEFENSE COSTS

This is a point that gives a lot of undue heartache to all par-
ties. The question is: who picks up the legal tab if there is a
third-party lawsuit in connection with this acquisition? This
is a broad point, and the lawsuits have to be directly tied to
your representations and warranties.
   The most obvious one is around the intellectual property
claims. If you get sued by someone who believes you are
infringing on their patents, the buyer will be stuck with the
legal defense costs. Even if the accusers are no more than pat-
ent trolls, the legal costs can add up quickly with large com-
panies, prompting a settlement. The buyers will look for an


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   141
agreement that doesn’t include a “knowledge qualifier”; how-
ever, it’s in your best interest to keep the language. The differ-
ence is that with a qualifier, the buyers will have to prove that
you knew there was an issue, and you hid that evidence during
the acquisition discussions. This is a high bar to clear, and
that’s why buyers almost always want to remove this language.
  Their argument will be that this lawsuit would not have
existed without the acquisition, and it won’t matter if you are
infringing or not, or whether you knew about it or not. In their
minds, either way the legal costs are your responsibility. You
will argue that the very reason patent trolls are coming out of
the woodwork is because the bigger company is a target with
large checkbooks. If there is infringement, fair, your investors
should pay. If there isn’t, the buyer should pick up the tab.
  This point can go either way, and it all depends on whether
the buyer is open to sharing the risk around future problems.
Legal bills are costly either way—better to pay your M&A
counsel to get these points right than to pay the buyer’s law-
yers to dispense with claims later!


Rep and warranty insurance: Since we have been using the
insurance analogy, it is only natural that some companies
have switched to buying actual insurance policies to get rid of
much of the indemnity structure altogether.
  This makes a lot of sense to us! These insurance prod-
ucts have been around for a while and are heavily used in


142   //   E XIT RIGHT
the PE industry. They are not widely adopted by strategic
tech buyers, but companies like Atlassian have already made
this their standard. There is a deductible like all insurance
products, usually 1 percent of the purchase price, and that is
much better than a 10–20 percent escrow. The premiums are
usually 3–4 percent of the coverage limit, and both the pre-
mium and the deductible can be negotiated to be split with
the buyer.
  Here is the actual language from the Atlassian term sheet
blog post7:


  Escrow and Insurance
  As partial security for Atlassian’s post-Closing indemni-
  fication rights, an amount equal to 1% of the Purchase
  Price (the “Escrow Amount”) would be held in a third
   party escrow fund for 15 months after the Closing.
     Atlassian would obtain a representations and war-
   ranties insurance policy (“R&W Insurance”) in connec-
  tion with the Proposed Transaction. The premium, taxes,
  commissions and any other fees and expenses payable
  in connection with obtaining R&W Insurance coverage
   for a policy limit of 4% of the Purchase Price (the “R&W
  Insurance Expenses”) would be paid for by the Sellers.


  All of this leads to our ultimate number; once all the
deductions are done and the ranges are solidified, we have a


                             W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   143
number from which to begin the rest of the process. However,
just like a financing round, the price is only a third of the bat-
tle. There are two more important buckets of items that the
founders need to pay extra attention to.


CLOSING CERTAINTY

Who cares about a $100 million price tag if the deal has lots
of uncertain conditions and risk? This is one of the easy
parts to overlook—the price negotiation can be tense, and
less experienced founders assume that the internal align-
ment and closing conditions are relatively straightforward.
Mert recalled thinking to himself during the deal with
SwipeSense, Why would they bother putting all of this work
in if the internal alignment isn’t there to begin with? But it
does happen, and because it is a possibility for you in the
future, we want to make sure you’re prepared. Here are a
few details to pay attention to in your term sheet when the
time comes.


Buyer approvals: Of course, in FAIR deals, alignment around
the approvals happens much earlier than the term sheet. You
should look for language in the term sheet that confirms the
expectations from both sides. If they are silent on the condi-
tions of closing, below are a set of questions to ask the M&A
team in the review conversation:


144   //   E XIT RIGHT
  • Does the term sheet have the support of the right
     people in senior management? Are there any naysayers
     who can veto the deal? Who is the ultimate approver?


  • Has the buyer’s board reviewed, socialized, and
     approved the transaction? Especially with public
     companies, this is critical.


  • If this is a large acquisition by a public company, their
     large shareholders will need to vote on the deal to
     approve it. What are the expectations around the
     process? Have the shareholders ever turned down a deal?


  • What are the key conditions to closing?


  It is important to note that all of these approvals, even
in writing, are given with the expectation that due diligence
doesn’t uncover skeletons in the closet.


Key due diligence items and timeline: The first item to clear
away is the type of due diligence the buyers will require—is
this confirming what we already know, or will you use the due
diligence to determine the final price of the company?
  This is extremely important; if the buyer is “guessing”
the value of the company, you shouldn’t have made it this
far in the process. The rationale behind the deal needs to be


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   145
supported by data, time, and relationships—the amount of
work required to perform the full due diligence is enormous.
For a founder, this isn’t worrisome because the buyers may
find something they shouldn’t; rather, you should worry that
the company is going to be extremely distracted during this
process. This is what makes signing a term sheet the point of
no return; don’t go into a complicated due diligence process
without having the full intention to close the deal.
  It is always a good idea to put a rough timeline in the term
sheet, as well as a list of material due diligence items. The
exclusivity period and the time it takes to complete due dili-
gence can be different.


Exclusivity period: As we iterated earlier in this book, time
is not your friend when it comes to the actual sale. The ele-
ments of FAIR need time to mature; however, the goal of put-
ting in all this time in advance has a goal of accelerating the
process at this stage.
  Buyers will want the reassurance that you won’t shop
around the deal to other buyers for a certain period of time.
Hopefully, the partner you are negotiating with is truly your
FAIR home, so alternatives aren’t on the table. This isn’t
always the case, so make sure that you are agreeing to a
period that you can honor. Remember that the other options
will likely be dead and cold after this period. No one wants to
play second fiddle to another company.


146   //   E XIT RIGHT
   To avoid tension, it is important to define the circum-
stances that will extend the exclusivity period. Be wary of
evergreen definitions of exclusivity, meaning that the period
would continue indefinitely until one of the parties gave
notice to the other one. IBM made this term popular, and it
doesn’t sound as bad at first—all you have to do is to give a
heads-up to let the other side know you aren’t extending.
   However, in practical terms, this sounds awful—like you
are walking away from the deal or you are going to evaluate
another offer. This will likely upset your counterpart, and
unfortunately damage the deal. This is why it is best to clarify
and avoid evergreen terms in general.
   Most of the exclusivity language we reviewed includes
financing the company in any shape or form, because raising
a large round typically competes with selling the company.
However, there will be instances when the shareholders
might need to float the operations for a few more months to
close out the deal. These are referred to as the bridge rounds,
and buyers will have no problem with them as long as you
disclose the purpose and the amount ahead of time.
   Finally, it is expected that if the buyer behaves in bad faith,
such as changing the price or another material term, the
exclusivity will be voided. This detail is critical to address, as
you should probably move on from the acquisition altogether
if there is bad faith on either side.




                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   147
Closing conditions: Apart from timeline and process, there
are hard requirements unique to each deal that will need to
be checked off before the closing. It is rare to have all of these
spelled out in the term sheet unless the seller has tons of
leverage. Regardless, it is in your best interest to ask ques-
tions pertaining to the actual criteria for the close. Here are
some examples of the various kinds of conditions.


   • Antitrust and Other Regulatory Approvals: The bigger
      the acquisition, the bigger the risk that the FTC or
      DOJ will have something to say about it. This can be
      massive, and if there is a material risk associated with
      antitrust, it is typical to see reverse break-up fees (the
      amount of money sellers receive if the deal falls apart
      due to antitrust concerns) in the deal.


   • Bring-Down Standard to the Representations and
      Warranties: This means that we need to be clear about
      what will constitute a breach of promises such that
      the buyer has the right to walk away. Not all errors are
      malicious; for instance, it’s common to see a handful of
      shares get miscalculated from one spreadsheet to the
      next. How will the closing documents define the range
      of the error? Think of it as defining the reasonable
      approach to an error—you don’t want to throw the
      baby out with the bathwater in every small issue.


148   //   E XIT RIGHT
  There are three kinds of standards to inquire about
  that clarify the effect of an error.
    ɐ   Material Adverse Effect: This is the most common
        standard, and one you should push for. It
        essentially means that there was a big problem
        to the tune of 25–30 percent of an important
        number like revenue. This is the standard public
        companies use in their acquisitions, since the cost
        of a deal that falls apart due to technicalities like
        this one is massive.
    ɐ   Material: This is a much lower standard, think
        5–10 percent. This is known colloquially as the
        “get me out of the deal” standard—it will be trivial
        to find some documentation that has this level
        of an error in it. It isn’t impossible to see, but it
        should raise an eyebrow.
    ɐ   Flat: This is the toughest standard; it means
        everything is correct to the most absolute term
        possible. This is virtually impossible to guarantee—
        what if there was a $10,000 calculation error in
        one option for one employee? This gives buyers
        a huge amount of leverage: essentially a right to
        walk away from the deal anytime.


• Employee Conditions: The next section will go into
  detail on these, but the buyers might require a


                             W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //    149
      certain percentage of employees to sign their new
      employment agreements before closing the deal.
      Again, in a FAIR deal, this is not an issue because your
      teammates should be thrilled with the exciting new
      vision for their future. However, it is wise to avoid
      putting the fate of the deal in the hands of a small
      group of employees who may not be privy to every
      step of your exit journey.


  • Stockholder Approval Thresholds: This is the percentage
      of your shareholders that will need to approve the
      transaction—typically 85–95 percent. Common
      perception might be that only 51 percent of the
      shareholders need to approve, but this creates
      risk for the 49 percent if they do not agree to the
      indemnification provisions of the deal or if they decide
      to sue the acquirer down the road. This requirement
      for such a high percentage can put a lot of leverage
      into the hands of very few; be careful if you have
      dissident holders, ousted founders, or shareholders
      in other jurisdictions. The best way to avoid issues
      here is to eliminate dead equity on the cap table as
      much as possible; these are the shareholders in your
      startup who are no longer adding value. As long as
      the shareholders are informed, this should only be a
      mildly frustrating exercise of chasing down signatures.


150   //   E XIT RIGHT
• Third-Party Consents: You might be under contracts
  with your customers, licensors, or suppliers that
  require them to sign off on the transaction before it
  can proceed. Ideally, these provisions are rare, but a
  very typical place to find them is in your office lease.
  Landlords have been known to stick up closing, for
  instance, to negotiate higher rents. If they are key
  licensors or customers, they might require better
  terms before they consent.


• 280G Approvals: This is another point where we will ask
  you to double-check this with your lawyer since things
  can get complicated. The IRS has a complex tax rule that
  essentially states that if you are making too much money
  too fast, you might face an extra 20 percent in taxes.
     The formula to determine whether you qualify for
  this bracket is calculated; it involves your past three
  years of earnings and the full disclosure of the amount
  you are making in closing. The top employee earners
  in any deal typically qualify for this, including the
  founding team.
     Now it’s not the end of the world—you can be
  exempt from this tax if you convince 75 percent of
  the noninterested voters to approve the 280G vote.
  (This means that you can’t vote for it if you are going
  to benefit from the vote.) You also aren’t allowed to


                           W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   151
      combine this signature with the closing documents;
      your shareholders can vote no here and approve the deal.
           Needless to say, issues arise when all shareholders
      are sent a notice that includes the past three years
      of earnings and the exit proceeds of a handful of
      employees. Note that the employees (current or former)
      who aren’t making as much also get to see those
      numbers, and that can cause quite a bit of tension
      internally. Especially in situations where shareholders
      or disgruntled early employees who have an ax to grind
      against the top earners get involved. Translation: you
      can get totally screwed over this point or be forced to
      pay an extra 20 percent in taxes if you aren’t careful.


   • Governing Law: Finally, understand the governing law
      for the whole agreement. Certain jurisdictions are
      more friendly to sellers; certain ones are advantageous
      to the buyer. This is a point to clarify with your lawyer.
      Aim for the neutral playing ground, but know that
      sellers will usually have little to no leverage here.


PERSONNEL AGREEMENTS

The first item we covered is the price, and while it impacts
everyone, that’s the most important element to your inves-
tors. The second item was the certainty of closing, which


152   //   E XIT RIGHT
similarly impacts everyone, but your board of directors cares
most about this point.
  The final element impacts the deal as a whole, but it is spe-
cifically focused on your team members. You’re going to see
details around all the HR-related issues born from the acqui-
sition in your term sheet. A company, above all, is a group of
people working towards a shared goal and needs to be taken
care of and accounted for as such.
  The rationale dictates the goal, but motivated talent must
be surrounding the objective to make sure it is successful.
Let’s now explore the many ways personnel are impacted
with the acquisition.


Organizational structure: The integration plan defines the
ultimate structure that works best for the strategy; this is
another instance where there is no “one size fits all” approach.
There are instances where it makes sense for the company to
stay independent, others where it makes sense to fully inte-
grate the company and restart as a division within the new
parent. FAIR deals will have this answered before the term
sheet. Gary Johnson likes talking about integration before
the term sheet for this reason. The ultimate objective is to
understand the right strategy to win together.
  Parallel to the structure, the term sheet ideally defines
reporting and governance requirements of the company. You
should know the objectives of your new manager and the


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   153
new business unit—after all, they are your objectives now,
along with your existing milestones ahead.
  This is also where you see the brass tacks of what is going
to happen to your team. Will everyone get an offer? If there
are redundancies, there are key questions to answer: who will
be let go after the exit, what will be their severance payments,
and who will pick up the tab?


Retention incentives: There are usually three parts to this
construct. The objective is simple: allocate enough resources
towards motivating the team once the deal is done.


   • Revesting Equity: This means that the equity vesting
      clock is reset for certain deal proceeds, usually only
      for key members of the team. Understandably, this
      is frustrating for founders and the key employees.
      They worked hard for their equity and in certain
      cases, walked away from cash compensation to earn
      it. While this is a “stick” approach, unfortunately it
      happens regularly, and it is imperative to understand
      the new vesting schedule and the acceleration
      triggers. For instance, what happens if the buyer
      changes their mind in ninety days and decides to fire
      these key employees without cause? It is unlikely, but
      this is why it matters.




154   //   E XIT RIGHT
   • Go-Forward Incentive Pool: This is the pool of money
      the buyer allocates to motivate the team. Think of it as
      a separate increase to the price for those participating;
      the money here is not for all shareholders, but just for
      employees. As a founder, you should clarify details on
      what happens if people leave—can you “recycle” their
      incentive for others? This can be cash, stock, or a mix
      of both. For simplicity purposes, think of this as the
     “carrot” approach.


   • Unvested Equity Assumptions: If there is a significant
      retention value in the target’s unvested options or
      other incentive equity, that could mean the buyer is
      already getting meaningful, inherent retention built in.
      To simplify incentives moving forward, the buyer can
      just choose to keep things as they are by assuming the
      unvested options directly.


   Regardless of where the chips fall, make sure to negotiate
these three items in conjunction with each other. The objec-
tive is to find the right mix where the buyer feels confident
the team is here to stay, and you, as the seller, feel like you are
getting a fair return.


Key Employee Conditions: Retention of a small group of the
management team—usually the founding team and senior


                                W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   155
leadership—is often a closing condition. This is as black and
white as it gets: they must be in their chairs as a condition
to closing. If this is the case, who these folks are must be
defined so there are no surprises. Since this is a closing con-
dition, it is critical to have employee agreements and other
arrangements sorted in parallel with the definitive closing
documents. Later on, we will dig into the importance of hav-
ing individual counsel to make sure this doesn’t hold the deal
hostage. The last place you want to find yourself is standing
between “everyone getting paid” and “no one getting paid.”


Technical Employees: Sometimes there is a separate bucket
for engineers if that team is crucial to the success of the com-
pany and the product. Depending on the size of this group,
it’s not unusual to see a threshold of 85–90 percent “accep-
tance” rates of offer letters. This book is written with technol-
ogy startups in mind, but this can apply to any specialized set
of skilled employees that are hard to recruit.


Rest of the World: Once the key leadership and technical
teams are sorted out, you have to clarify if there are expec-
tations on acceptance letters from the rest of the team. The
objective is simple: of course all parties want to make sure the
team is happy and productive in their new home. The ques-
tion is who is responsible; if there is a high threshold of accep-
tance, the success or failure of the deal is on your shoulders.


156   //   E XIT RIGHT
If the buyers are comfortable leaving this until after the close,
this means that they are responsible for retaining the team
in the long term.


Salary and Bonus Structure: Most term sheets will have
language around new employment packages—namely, that
they are going to be equivalent or better to what people are
currently getting paid. This is mostly what ends up happen-
ing; startups typically have lower salaries on average than
established companies. Don’t expect offer letters for the
whole team (unless it is a closing condition) until the final
documents are signed.
  Always remember that titles matter a lot more in estab-
lished companies than startups. Prepare yourself to fight just
as hard for titles, since larger companies often determine
pay grades by title. The difference between a title of engi-
neer or senior engineer could be worth tens of thousands
of dollars in stock compensation. It is your job as leader of
the company to thoroughly research how the acquiring com-
pany uses titles and pay to ensure that your team is ade-
quately compensated.


Relocation: It might sound small, but there are many exam-
ples of how this issue ends up tanking deals. The buyer might
have an expectation that everyone works under the same
roof and will need to outline their plans here. It is fair to


                               W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   157
push back for resources to make sure the relocation process
is smooth for your team members.


Noncompetes and Nonsolicits: This basically means that an
employee leaving the company will not be allowed to work
in the same space or solicit the existing team to leave and
join them. These are highly contentious and might not even
be enforceable in states such as California. A direct conver-
sation with the counterpart is also required to understand
expectations here—make sure there is clarity around scope
and duration. Even defining the timeline can have variations,
such as being measured from closing date or date of leaving
the parent company.


Waiver of Double-Trigger: Finally, the acquirers can require
the team members to waive their acceleration rights. This
would apply for instances where the employees have agree-
ments for their current roles that outline what happens if
the company is acquired. Single-trigger means that no matter
what happens, all unvested stock becomes yours the second
the company changes hands. Double-trigger means that all
unvested stock is yours if the company changes hands and
the buyer doesn’t offer a similar or better role to keep you
as part of the team. Waiving these rights certainly puts the
power in the buyer’s hands, but it will come at the price of a
deeply frustrated team from day one.


158   //   E XIT RIGHT
THE CHECKLIST OF KEY TERMS

We are not your lawyers, and we didn’t write this book with
the intention of replacing legal professionals. As we discussed
in the key stakeholders chapter, you definitely will need the
support of a reputable firm, and in particular, an M&A spe-
cialist who has been through the trenches before. This should
definitely not be their first term sheet, and their experience
with how this document compares to previous documents
will be invaluable.
   Here are the top terms you should definitely ask your law-
yer and the buyer representative to explain to you. This is our
guidance on what terms matter the most and ones that likely
won’t matter. Once again, think of this as a cheat sheet for
quick explanations—you should most definitely understand
every single item on the term sheet to avoid leaving millions
on the table.


  1. Price
       a. Calculation
       b. Front-end adjustments
       c. Back-end adjustments
  2. Closing conditions and timeline
       a. Necessary approvals
       b. Due diligence checklist
       c. Exclusivity and expiration date


                              W H AT IS A T ER M SHEE T?   //   159
  3. Personnel agreements
           a. Organizational structure
           b. Governance
           c. Retention and incentive arrangements


  This is to arm you with information so that you can receive
the best advice from your attorney. Assuming you have a real
expert working for you, you must listen with humility to their
sage advice while having a firm grasp of what is important
and really worth fighting for, and what are the minor points
that you shouldn’t waste cycles and dollars fighting over.
  Avoid falling into the pit of the “average” term. Each deal
is unique, and it makes a CEO look amateurish if you push
back by saying your terms are different than most. Instead,
work on understanding why a term is different than average,
and make your arguments based on that core difference.
  Above all, don’t sign anything until you are confident you
understand, and agree with, each part of the term sheet. This
is your future, and the future of your company.




160   //    E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R      8


HOW TO MAXIMIZE
VALUE THROUGHOUT
THE PROCESS




C
      ongratulations, you have a term sheet in
      hand. This is the point of no return. You have selected
      your dance partner and you’re moving forward into
      your future with the makings of a FAIR deal. While a
term sheet is not a final guarantee that a deal will happen
(nothing but the actual closed deal will guarantee that), this
stage should be the moment of spiritual alignment. This is an
important step, but there is still a long way to go. Throughout
this process from a signed term sheet to money in the bank,
there are still many ways to either drive greater value or
screw it up.
   But the term sheet is an important milestone that means
there is a real commitment on both sides.
   Once you have signed a term sheet, you should act—and
assume that the buyer will act—in good faith. From this
moment forward, all parties should be trying to close the
deal and momentum will be building towards completing the
transaction. If you are not ready to make that final commit-
ment, you shouldn’t sign the term sheet. It’s that simple. For
instance, if the buyer finds out that your company has a law-
suit looming over it that wasn’t disclosed, they have every
right to walk away given that you did not act in good faith.
If there are any skeletons in your closet or issues that an
acquirer should know about, you are always better off being
the one to disclose it rather than letting them discover it on
their own through their due diligence. Always. It will come
out eventually and it will only erode trust if they feel like you
are withholding information.
  This also includes technology and security audits. In today’s
world, IP ownership and a tight security infrastructure really
matter. Don’t wait until the end of the deal to do a thorough
technology audit. If it’s going to blow up the deal, isn’t it bet-
ter to find out sooner and save both time and money?




162   //   E XIT RIGHT
THE DOS AND DON’TS OF USING A BANKER DURING NEGOTIATION

Our recommendation is that the CEO be the point person
on negotiating, but we also realize that not every CEO is a
master negotiator. If negotiating is not your strength, or if
you want to have someone else take point on a particularly
difficult conversation, it certainly is valid to have someone
else lead the process.
  Personal relationships and trust will often solve problems
that can only be handled by the key stakeholders. When
SurePayroll was negotiating their sale to Paychex, the personal
relationships between the executives of the two companies
smoothed troubled waters. After the term sheet was signed
and the deal almost done, it came to light that SurePayroll
still had outstanding payments to collect from customers
that would carry over post-transaction and become Paychex’s
responsibility. If Paychex did not successfully collect, that
money would be taken out of the escrow—meaning that
less money would be eventually paid back to the SurePayroll
shareholders. This outstanding issue created an impasse at
the final stages of the deal. Neither side would budge from
their position, and the long sought-after deal was in jeop-
ardy. Crucially, at this point in the process, it’s important to
understand that this was not simply SurePayroll’s problem.
Paychex needed to acquire SurePayroll as much as SurePayroll
needed to be acquired by Paychex.


                              HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   163
  The CEO of Paychex stepped up to the plate and looked
Scott Wald, the Chairman of SurePayroll, in the eye and
promised they would collect the money. They shook hands.
The deal closed. Paychex honored their commitment, and no
money was ever taken out of the escrow. According to Scott
Wald, who recounted this story, “We met at a hotel bar, and
he looked me in the eye, and I felt enough trust was there to
make the deal go through.”
  If you outsource your negotiating, you might maximize
your return, but you also will limit trust-building and lose
these types of opportunities.
  Creating the legal framework that would mandate Paychex
using their best efforts to collect the missing invoices would
have been time-consuming and difficult to do. Even in the
event that was made possible, auditing the effort is nearly
impossible given the complicated process of collections. Trust
made the difference in moving forward, and it all worked out
in the end.
  This dynamic is not possible without personal rela-
tionships involved, and those are something you cannot
outsource.
  The largest determinant of whether or not to use a banker
is related to the size of the deal. If the deal you are nego-
tiating falls below $75 million or so, it’s likely not going to
warrant using investment bankers. At that size, the potential
payout for the bankers won’t be large enough to attract the


164   //   E XIT RIGHT
interest of A-level players—and at that point, less than stel-
lar talent can hurt rather than help the negotiations.
  But assuming your transaction is large enough to war-
rant using a banker, what is the best way to use them from
this point forward? How can you make sure to get the most
bang for your buck? One advantage of using a banker is that
they see many more deals than you will and have a better
understanding of market norms. They earn their fees based
on the final price of the sale, so if your goal is to maximize
every penny you can, a banker’s interests are perfectly
aligned with that goal. Having a banker negotiate the hard
deal points allows you to “preserve” your good relationships
and not have to be drawn into possibly contentious nego-
tiations that could impact future personal relationships.
Remember, this is the company you are potentially going to
work for post-transaction. It is sometimes helpful to have
a barrier between the two parties if, but more likely when,
things get heated.
  On the other side, every single corp dev leader we spoke
to dismissed bankers and wished they weren’t there. Yes,
this is self-serving because they think bankers drive up the
price and make the negotiations harder. That being said,
most CEOs don’t know how to manage their bankers, and
as a result, bankers can drive too hard a bargain by setting
unrealistic expectations. Bankers can also “protect” the CEO
too well and get in the way of the CEO forming the necessary


                             HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   165
personal relationships. The worst reason for a deal to die is
that a banker has essentially cratered it.
  At the end of the day, it’s up to the CEO to manage the
bankers, the process, and the final negotiating points. The
more you understand where your hard lines are, the easier it
will be to give directions to your banker.


MANAGING YOUR LEGAL TEAM TO MAXIMIZE
EFFECTIVENESS AND REDUCE COST

Assuming, of course, you heeded our earlier advice and paid
up to hire experienced M&A attorneys, this is the point when
hiring for that experience will pay off. While they will have a
team to support you, in general, you should work with the
most senior attorney on key strategic questions. While one
hour of their time will be expensive, their insights and wis-
dom can cut straight to the point and save you both time and
serious money over the long run. In addition, have your data
room in good working order before you start this process.
Nothing will rack up unnecessary legal fees like having highly
paid lawyers tracking down unsigned contracts.
  You should have a conversation with your senior attor-
ney ahead of time about prioritizing issues and risks. Your
attorneys’ job is to manage risk and to save you from your-
self. However, not all risks are created equal. Some attorneys
will fight equally as hard for the minor points as the major


166   //   E XIT RIGHT
ones. It is critically important to work out a process with your
attorney ahead of time, and a framework for decision making
to help classify and understand the level of risk on any partic-
ular item. Know what is worth fighting for and material, and
what isn’t.
   Lawyers work for you and it’s up to you to determine what
the important business priorities are. Jason Seats, Chief
Investment Officer of Techstars, emphasizes this key point
when counseling entrepreneurs. He said, “You cannot out-
source judgment to the lawyers.”
  You should avoid having your attorney negotiate a major
deal point on your behalf with the opposing attorney—at all
costs. One way to quickly tank a deal and rapidly escalate ten-
sions and costs is to have two attorneys going back and forth
over major deal points. We cannot emphasize this enough:
major deal points should be negotiated between you and the
appropriate business champion on the other side if at all pos-
sible. Business unit leaders should be negotiating business
terms; lawyers should be negotiating legal points.
   Lawyers hate to put caps on their fees for obvious reasons.
Asking them to do this before a term sheet is in hand won’t
generate an effective estimate and won’t endear you to your
legal team. They simply don’t have enough information to
be able to accurately provide a number for the cap without
knowing the details. However, once you get to this point, a
seasoned M&A Attorney should have a pretty good sense of


                              HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   167
how much time will be needed to close a transaction. If you
can, now would be a good time to negotiate a cap on their fees.
   In truth, everyone hates paying legal fees and many feel
like their legal fees were too expensive post-transaction.
Most lawyers know this angst exists but urge the business
community to consider the difference in attitudes between
paying a lawyer or paying a banker post-transaction. No one
seems to mind paying their banker the fees (typically sub-
stantially more than the lawyers), but everyone hates pay-
ing their legal bill. If Kahneman and Thaler have taught us
anything, it’s that humans are predictably irrational. Yes, the
legal bill stings. But there is real value there.
   So, do yourself a favor. Hire the best M&A attorney you
can find. Follow these guidelines. Be judicial in how you use
and manage them. And then take comfort in the knowledge
that you made the best decision and were smart and well-jus-
tified in getting the representation you needed to make this
deal happen.


ONE VOICE TO RULE THEM ALL: ONGOING ALIGNMENT

Corp dev professionals manage transactions every day. You
might do it—at most—a handful of times in your life. There’s
a good chance you’re reading this because you’re about to go
through your first one. There is an asymmetry of experience
between you and the buyer.


168   //   E XIT RIGHT
   For instance, one thing you’ll see as you navigate your first
exit (and hopefully the others after) is the divide-and-con-
quer technique of corporate development leaders. The buyers
will constantly probe for differences in opinions between the
board, CEO, and other key executives—even different classes
of shareholders who have different financial motivations and
timelines. They will ask the same questions multiple times
to multiple stakeholders to see if the answers vary at all. The
more they understand key differences, the better they may
exploit them to negotiate a better deal for them and a worse
deal for you.
   It is critical that you have only one person, ideally the
CEO, be the point of contact and the only person responsi-
ble for negotiating. Deals can quickly go off the rails when
multiple people are talking. Let’s revisit Anne Bonaparte, the
CEO who has successfully led and navigated six companies
through exits. During one of these transactions she said, “I
had a VC investor who was on my board and thought he could
negotiate a better deal. And he reached out directly to the
acquiring company without my permission!” She continued,
“Of course I found out about it, and just thought it was a real
shame and made us look desperate. I think ultimately this lit-
tle move cost us maybe millions off the sale price in the end.”
   Get your ducks in a row. You need to have an explicit conver-
sation, beforehand, with your board, your investors, and your
key employees on what they can and cannot communicate or


                              HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   169
say. We promise, being thoughtful and proactive about com-
munication with your internal stakeholders ahead of time will
save you a lot of pain. You might not have as much experience
as some of your investors but having a singular voice for the
company will save you headaches down the road. There can
only be one voice. You need to step up, have a direct conversa-
tion, and assert your authority if that voice is yours.
  The more clarity you have—and can communicate with
authority—on where you draw the line, the more effective
and impactful the negotiation. You should also expect this
same level of clarity from your buyer. The sooner both sides
understand their respective nonnegotiable points, the faster
you will get to a decision. If something is truly nonnegotiable,
don’t be afraid to express it up front. A fast answer—espe-
cially a quick no—is always better than a long, distracting,
and expensive process.


COMMUNICATIONS WITH BUYERS AND YOUR TEAM:
INFORMATION ASYMMETRY, INTEGRITY, AND ALIGNMENT

We are big believers in empathy. The more you know about
the people who are sitting across the table from you, the
more you care about their success. And the more you genu-
inely care about their success, the more successful you will be.
   Most CEOs sit back and wait for the acquiring company to
tell them why they are interested. We vehemently disagree


170   //   E XIT RIGHT
with this common course of action. There is a fundamental
information asymmetry between the larger acquiring com-
pany and you. Your job is to fix that. You both must learn
everything you possibly can about the other’s company, but
you have to help build and craft the rationale for why this
investment makes sense to the acquiring company.
  Rishad Tobaccowala, former Chief Strategy Officer at
Publicis, said that larger companies are “process driven”
while entrepreneurs, by necessity, are “instinct driven.” That
means that the larger company has a formal evaluation pro-
cess. Understanding that process will help unlock how they
think and what is important to them.
  Rishad also believes that larger companies are not look-
ing for incremental improvements. If buying your company
will result in an incremental gain, then they could build it
themselves. Larger companies are looking for game-chang-
ing, step-changing, real impact. Your job is to make that case.
  So how do you do it? Hard work and research. Start with
corp dev. Remember every conversation is bidirectional.
Start asking questions about their strategic objectives. If
possible—and every company is different—find the busi-
ness champion and together build the business case for stra-
tegic impact.
  Pro tip: if the acquiring company is publicly traded, then
go back and start reading/listening to their quarterly earn-
ings call and find out what the company is reporting on, what


                             HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   171
promises they are making about the future, and what ques-
tions the analysts are asking and tracking. The analyst can
actually be a fantastic resource—go and talk to them and
have a conversation about what they are looking for and
think about the future of that company.
   Bottom line: do not wait for them to tell you the greater
why; do not sit back and let them run the show. Remember
that deals can and often fall apart even after a term sheet,
especially when there is a lack of alignment in telling the
greater strategic story. The key to alleviating tension is com-
munication with cadence: regular stand-ups as part of the
purchase process.
  Creating structure, engineering a process, and overcom-
municating all take valuable time. Time that’s worth spending.
There are always problems in all deals. With a standardized
communication process, there are expectations and trust
that help ensure accountability and remove any unnecessary
fear or doubt about games being played. In the absence of
knowledge, basic human nature is to assume the worst in the
other party. Don’t let doubt fester. Keep regular calls with
each important stakeholder so that no conversation ever
feels too dire. You will feel neither desperate nor secretive if
each conversation is planned weeks in advance.
  This is a key part of Atlassian’s strategy as well. Sarah
Hughes, Director of Corporate Development, quickly figured
out this secret as she was first getting started. M&A deals


172   //   E XIT RIGHT
are full of emotional turmoil and rough patches. The best
way she has found to make sure these inevitable bumps in
the road don’t derail the deal is to make a daily five-minute
check-in meeting with the founder sacrosanct. “It’s a nonne-
gotiable part of my process now,” she said, adding, “There’s
no getting around the fact that you have to be in constant
communication every single day while you are in the period
in between issuing a term sheet and closing.”


Startup Communication Strategies
with Key Leadership and Team
Deals by their very nature are often secretive. While you are
meeting with your lawyers, bankers, and running the deal,
your team is hopefully running your business. You can’t be
two places at once, and you need to trust that your team
is holding down the fort. One important reason that deals
can fall apart is if the seller’s business loses any momentum
during the due diligence process. If progress slows down for
any reason, the acquiring company is going to investigate,
which could lead to second-guessing their purchase.
  Each CEO will handle this differently and there is no single
correct approach. We tend to err on the side of making sure
your key executive team knows what you are doing and how
you are spending your time. Just like you have built a regu-
lar cadence of communication with the acquiring company,
we think it’s equally as important to provide your executive


                             HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   173
team with regular updates on your progress. Once again, in
the absence of information, human nature is to fill in the
blanks and sometimes assume the worst. Confidentiality is
key here and you have to ensure and set the expectations up
front that your team will not share any of this.
  As far as the rest of the company is concerned, the rule of
thumb is to keep things confidential until you see the finish
line. As you go through due diligence, certainly key members
of your technical team will get involved in explaining your
tech, as well as some members of your finance team that
will be part of the transaction. Word gets out, especially on
smaller teams. Ultimately, it’s your decision, but our recom-
mendation is once you are at this juncture of a signed term
sheet, you probably will have to tell your full team.
   Remember FAIR. Lay it out for them. Set their expecta-
tions carefully for what it will mean for them. People will be
nervous. They will have questions that they expect answers
to. They’ll want to know if they’re losing their job, if their
position is changing, if they will gain financially from the sale,
and many more questions.
   We think the Golden Rule applies. How would you like to
be treated? What would you like to know if you were in their
position? Never commit to anything you can’t deliver, but
remind your team that you are advocating on every share-
holder’s behalf, including theirs.




174   //   E XIT RIGHT
TACTICS TO KEEP MOVING FORWARD

Identify the business champion to negotiate on the start-
up’s behalf.
   Every acquiring company is different, and each will run a
different process. With some companies, the transaction will
be CEO led. With others, it will be the corp dev team that
identifies and leads the transaction. Still other companies
will be led by their product teams. For example, at Apple
(in most cases), it’s the product manager who identifies and
leads the deal, while at Google it may typically start with corp
dev. At PayPal it’s the corp dev team who leads the strategic
charge. Your job is to understand the culture and process of
the acquiring company and identify your key business cham-
pion. This is critically important when negotiating.
  And we’ve said it once, but we’ll say it again: business lead-
ers should be negotiating key business terms—not attorneys.
You will need your business champion for every step of work-
ing through FAIR. And it will be your business champion
who will help you build out the case and lead you through the
inevitable rough patches. When that moment comes—and
it always does—that you hit an impasse, it will be the trust
and personal relationship you have built up with your busi-
ness champion that will inevitably carry the day. This is when
you call in the champion. When you hit the proverbial wall
and you can only negotiate so far, this is when your business


                              HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   175
champion becomes your advocate. You can only use them
once, maybe twice, so pick your moments. But don’t be afraid
to ask. Leveraging their internal goodwill and trust at a key
negotiating point can be the difference between a deal get-
ting done or not.


Create a Sense of Urgency to Drive Timeline
Keeping the ball moving forward can be difficult. Hopefully,
you are negotiating from a position of strength and are ready
to sell at the optimal time—because you want to, and not
because you are running out of money. The journey of a deal
can be maddeningly slow with fits of activity and moments
where it looks like nothing is happening. If you are the CEO,
this can be extreme torture. Stay calm, stay true to your path,
and be proactive whenever possible.
  While your options may be limited, larger companies are
going to have to work through their process; however, you do
still have some weapons at your disposal. Remember this is
not about you—it’s about them. This is where radical empa-
thy comes in. Pleading to get a deal done sooner will most
likely have the opposite effect. This is the moment for ratio-
nale to come shining through. Consider these questions:


   • If this is a game changer that will allow the buying
      company to grow market share, what is the
      opportunity cost of waiting?


176   //   E XIT RIGHT
   • If there is technology work to be done to integrate the
     two product lines or finish up features, how much are
     we leaving on the table by delaying?
   • If there are outside analysts looking for this
     functionality or competition who already have this,
     how will your internal sales team react when they
     don’t have this in their portfolio?


   Repeat after us: rationale, rationale, rationale. The more the
acquiring company believes in the deal rationale, the more
urgent their actions will be. In addition, they will be moti-
vated to work through the problems to maintain the closing
timeline.


Due Diligence is Bidirectional
Information is power. Every single time you have an inter-
action with the buying company, there is an opportunity to
learn more about them. Now that the term sheet is signed,
due diligence will begin in earnest from the buying company.
They are going to explore every nook and cranny of your busi-
ness. Nothing will go unexplored, so be prepared. This is also
the time for you to be doing your own due diligence. Think of
it as preparing for a job interview.
  After all, this will be your new employer. Going back to our
FAIR model, this is the time for you to be actively exploring
cultural fit: understanding their corporate decision-making


                              HOW T O M A XIMIZ E VAL UE   //   177
structure to help build their internal case for alignment, pre-
paring the mutual integration plan, and most importantly of
all—refining the rationale.
  Whatever you do, don’t sit back and let them manage the
process. You need to be just as proactive in gathering all the
information you can to help build the case and continue to
reinforce and push the sale through. Now is not the time
to stop and rest on your laurels. Momentum is good, but
momentum alone won’t get the deal across the finish line.




178   //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R       9


HOW TO KEEP YOUR
CALM AS THE CEO




L
     et’s take a moment to appreciate how intense
     this all is. Negotiating your life’s work is never easy or
     simple. It is by definition emotional, volatile, and height-
     ened. Your job is to recognize the situation for what it is
and be intentional about creating practices and surrounding
yourself with people that help you ride out the storm.
  Almost every individual we spoke with, no matter their
role, pointed to the importance of keeping yourself together.
Conflict is inevitable. Tension is everywhere, but your job as
a leader is to stay calm. Don’t panic and do project confidence.
Even in the moments you want to crawl into the fetal posi-
tion and hide in your bed, you must project confidence for
your team, stakeholders, and buyers. You will get through
this, one way or the other. We promise.
  There are a few important tactical tools to greatly reduce
tension and frameworks to help you work through issues.
Keep in mind that bigger problems begin as small problems.
The more proactive and in control you are, the more you can
resolve conflicts before they grow too large. Always keep the
long-term view in mind, communicate clearly, and continu-
ously align with each stakeholder.


THE IMPORTANCE OF A MENTOR OR BRAIN TRUST

You need people in your camp who have been where you are.
Even better if they have been where you are and have ended
up where you want to go.
   If this is your first transaction, having a mentor or brain
trust to call on is absolutely critical. But even if this is not
your first transaction, be assured that even the pros need an
inner circle of trusted advisors, if for no other reason than to
remind you that you aren’t losing your mind.
   In Thinking in Bets, PhD psychologist and champion poker
player Annie Duke writes her treatise on the psychology of
decision-making. She notes that brain trust groups of trusted
advisors help make us “more successful in fighting bias,


180   //   E XIT RIGHT
seeing the world more objectively, and, as a result, we will
make better decisions. Doing it on our own is just harder.”8
  Not only is the middle of a transaction emotionally
fraught, but there are, of course, legal ramifications and
confidentiality issues at play. You may feel pressure to iso-
late yourself with sensitive knowledge to protect against a
worst-case scenario of information getting leaked. But you
cannot navigate the stresses of this time by yourself. So yes,
you must have at least one person (but hopefully a couple of
people) who you can trust to the core. They can be a board
member, an investor, a co-founder, a fellow CEO, the right
legal counsel or banker, or even/especially a spouse or life
partner. There will be inevitable crises where their experi-
ence will come in handy. But you also need them for the day-
to-day gut checks: “Is this normal? What should I expect?
How would you handle this?”
  When Mert was in the middle of his transaction selling
his first company, SwipeSense, he was eventually able to put
together such a brain trust that ultimately helped him feel
secure enough to close the sale. On the other hand, had he
had trusted mentors in place at the very beginning of the sale
process, it might have reduced some of the personal heart-
ache that can, and often does, accompany this process.
  SwipeSense was Mert’s first company. He started it from
scratch when he was still a student at Northwestern and con-
tinued building up SwipeSense to its exit in March 2020. It


                 HOW T O K EEP Y OUR C AL M A S T HE CEO   //   181
was really his first job out of college, and with it he experi-
enced many important “firsts,” including his first acquisition.
  There were many times during the transaction process
that Mert felt cornered and alone. He experienced times
when he was sure the deal wouldn’t close and everything that
he had worked so hard for would come crashing down. These
moments of despair are inevitable, and he now realizes that
he would have benefited greatly by having someone he trusted
early on, to help keep him calm and give him perspective.
  Of course, Mert wasn’t alone in the deal: he had lawyers,
bankers, co-founders, teammates, investors, and a board of
directors. But each of these had competing incentives and
he felt inhibited in how he could discuss and present his
challenges.
  Ultimately, it was his responsibility to surround himself
with people wiser than himself, and that’s what led to the
ultimate success of his transaction.


YOU’RE NOT ALONE—THIS IMPACTS
YOUR FAMILY AS WELL, SO TURN THEM
INTO A SOURCE OF STRENGTH

It’s an incredibly long road to the final transaction—don’t
expect a FAIR deal to happen in the first five years of your
journey. For most of us, especially first-time entrepre-
neurs, we’ve risked everything, skated by with dicey health


182   //   E XIT RIGHT
insurance, and sunk every penny of savings into our business.
If you have a spouse or life partner, let’s just say this hasn’t
gone unnoticed.
   Mark’s first software company, the Whitewater Group,
was just getting going when his first daughter was born. His
wife, Marcie, who worked at the company making calls to
collect licensing fees, would often take the baby to work and
balance a crying baby in one arm while on the phone with a
delinquent customer. Startups are often a family affair, and
they have just as much at stake as you do.
  The stresses of a startup are real. The stresses of working
together with a significant other in a startup are a force mul-
tiplier. It can certainly work and there are many successful
examples of happy life partners and happy work partners.
For Mark, three weeks into having his wife work in the com-
pany, he asked her to do something (Mark remembers this
in the most polite and respectful way) and she threw up her
hands and said, “You’re not the boss of me!” and left with
their baby in tow. Clearly, in that case, it was helpful to have
separation of home and work.
   Regardless of how involved a spouse is with the day-to-day
business, they are involved in the exit. Spouses play an inte-
gral role in these situations because they have the most to
gain—but equally, the most to lose. And they often have paid
a dear price thus far to support the founder in the endless
and tireless pursuit of making their startup a success.


                  HOW T O K EEP Y OUR C AL M A S T HE CEO   //   183
   Recognizing where significant others can help and where they
can hurt is also a part of managing these critical relationships.
One banker told us a story about a company that received an
offer for $30 million. The spouses of the founders were ecstatic.
They had cartoon eyes filled with dollar signs and started to
spend the money in their heads. The banker felt the price was
too low and convinced the founders to keep on pushing. The
spouses were upset and strongly urged the founders to sell
immediately. Turns out the banker was right and the company,
after some back and forth, ended up selling for $70 million.
   Selling a company is incredibly stressful. On you, yes, but
also on your partner. Oftentimes there is an information
asymmetry because you are living it in the moment and have
way more information than your spouse does. Be sensitive to
their position, their feelings of lack of information and con-
trol. And enlist their help and support—if for nothing else,
emotional support. Remember, you are in this together.


STAYING CALM, EVEN, AND LIKABLE—
EVEN IF YOU FEEL LIKE LOSING CONTROL

When the world seems like it is crashing down on your shoul-
ders, remember this too shall pass. Throughout the book we
are hammering on the importance of building trust and hav-
ing a long-term view of your important milestones. This is
the moment when it comes into play.


184   //   E XIT RIGHT
  All deals have bad moments. Miscommunications happen
that drive our inner demons to assume the worst. The glue
that holds it all together is personal trust. We can’t tell you
enough how important it is to earn a reservoir of trust to call
upon in these moments. Trust enables you to give the other
side the benefit of the doubt. Trust is the lubricant that gets
the machinery going again.
   Equally important is your ability to adopt the mindset
of a long-time horizon. While this might be your first, it is
likely not your last exit. You have the rest of your life in front
of you. Post-transaction you will be wiser, with some hard-
fought wisdom, a little scar tissue, and the intellectual and
capital resources to do some real future damage. How you act
today matters. Your reputation is everything.
   When Cliff Shaw sold Mocavo, it was the result of a num-
ber of lessons he learned in his previous—and to his mind,
failed—transaction attempts with earlier startups. One of
the big lessons he learned was to manage the optics and keep
his cool no matter what. In a pivotal moment in his transac-
tion, the banker from the acquiring company called to share
that their side had serious concerns about the readiness of
Mocavo’s technology to scale.
  At that moment, Cliff was seeing red. Cliff responded in a
calm but firm way, “If you insult my team again, we are going
to walk away. Is this the kind of long-term partner you are
going to be? Is this your culture?” The banker backed off, the


                   HOW T O K EEP Y OUR C AL M A S T HE CEO   //   185
deal proceeded, and Cliff was grateful that he was able to
think critically and calmly in that fateful call.
   The relationships you forge will hopefully be with you not
only in this transaction but the many more to come. In the
process of writing this book, we interviewed corp dev leaders
from many large companies. When looking at their LinkedIn
profiles, do you know what they all have in common? They all
did corp dev for multiple companies. The person across the
table from you today may very well be across the table from
you for your next transaction—and they all talk to one another.
   So, stay calm. Don’t fly off the handle. Be in control of your
emotions (at least publicly). Don’t burn any bridges. Use the
twenty-four-hour rule. If you think something you are going
to write or say might be controversial, give yourself twen-
ty-four hours and the night to sleep on it. Or use the New
York Times rule: never say anything that you wouldn’t want to
become a headline in the New York Times. Whatever the frus-
tration, remember that the way to work it out is with—not
through—the other person. And most importantly, assume
good intentions until proven otherwise. Maneet Singh,
who works as a corp dev manager at Facebook, likes to say,
“Modulate the paranoia.”
   And while you’re at it, try to maintain equilibrium and a
good sense of humor. Human nature dictates that we want
to work with people we like. To the extent you can, try to be
pleasant. Crack a smile or be in good humor. It can’t be fake.


186   //   E XIT RIGHT
Everything you do has to be authentic to you. But remember,
this is also a job interview of sorts, so don’t be an asshole.
(Unless of course that is authentically who you are, in which
case it might be helpful to hire a banker to hide behind!)


PRACTICE AND PREPARATION—PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT

Ask any banker and they will tell you that M&A is both an
art and a science. Turns out that there are best practices and
guiding principles to managing a process. Gary Johnson told
us that “empathy is the most important skill set to have in
any transaction.” So be curious. Ask a ton of questions and
remember the answers you are given. Do what you can to
understand the other point of view and use it to help you
remain calm and focused.
  One of our favorite games to play during these stressful
times is “What If?” Model it out; if you can anticipate prob-
lems, you can be prepared with answers. The more you prac-
tice for possible outcomes, the calmer and more at ease you
will be when they happen.
  Cliff Shaw and his wife spent time together running
through scenarios, generating likely questions, and practicing
answers. It was this kind of muscle memory that helped him
react in the most advantageous way possible in the moment.
  One of the common ways founders get tripped up is when
corp dev professionals make the move to casually throw out


                  HOW T O K EEP Y OUR C AL M A S T HE CEO   //   187
a floater balloon of a number. Something along the lines of,
“Given market conditions, a purchase price of X seems reason-
able, right?” How you answer that question is critically import-
ant and can literally mean millions of dollars in your pocket.
   Some tools you can use to practice are:


   • Role-play different situations.
   • Write people cards that list personality traits and
      behaviors to expect.
   • Learn your lines—practice how you are going to
      answer potential questions ahead of time.
   • Build a habit of requesting information whenever you
      are asked for information. It’s always a great practice
      to ask why someone is asking for a specific piece of
      information or acting in a certain way, and to get in
      the habit of asking for reciprocating information.


FOUNDERS’ PERSONAL COUNSEL

Negotiating your personal employment agreement can either
be an extreme source of stress or an easy breezy process. One
element you can’t ignore is the potential conflict of inter-
est between what is best for you versus what is best for the
shareholders and the acquirer.
   Obviously, you want to be happy, and it’s also rational for
the acquirer to want you to be happy. Interests are aligned


188   //   E XIT RIGHT
there. But the devil is in the details. For instance, it would be
much more preferable for you if the key employees walked
away with their full proceeds from the exit. For the buyer, it
is much more preferable to have all of your earnings tied up
to continuous employment or future performance. The real-
ity is that it will fall somewhere in between, depending on
how well each side negotiates.
  A few pieces of advice here—first, if there isn’t a straight-
forward agreement on what you are looking for, get your own
HR counsel. Ultimately the M&A lawyers are working for the
shareholders, and they can’t give you advice that will jeop-
ardize the transaction. In other words, they will be working
hard to reduce risk from the deal as a whole versus protecting
your interests.
  You are an executive that is being courted to join another
leadership team; therefore it’s completely expected to have
your agreement reviewed in detail to make sure you under-
stand what you are agreeing to. And the little things matter.
For example, it’s likely that at the larger company, your title
will matter more than at the smaller startup, as larger com-
panies tend to tie titles to compensation levels.
   Second, don’t leave reviewing and negotiating your own
employee agreement—and those of your employees—until
the end. You do not want to be in the uncomfortable position
of being the person holding up the rest of the deal from mov-
ing forward. Putting yourself in this position will build up


                  HOW T O K EEP Y OUR C AL M A S T HE CEO   //   189
pressure and urgency to “just accept and move on” to close
the deal. But “hoping things just magically work out in the
end” is no strategy at all. Before the deal is done is the time
when you have the most sway and negotiating power.
  Use your good relationship with your board so that your
investors are positioned alongside you as allies in asking
for what will be good for the founders and the team. Brad
Feld, entrepreneur, author, blogger, and venture capitalist at
Foundry Group in Boulder, Colorado, emphasizes this point
in his speaking and writing on the subject: “If you have a
good relationship with your investors, address it with them
at the beginning of the transaction. Collectively agree to be
aligned throughout the process, with each of you reinforcing
messages to the buyer about this alignment.”
  This is important, especially in situations where the buyer
wants to go around the cap table and allocate more consider-
ation to employees, or when the transaction is modest and
the common stock and options receive little consideration.
If you are aligned with your investors on how to approach
things, what is fair, and where you both want things to land,
it’s much easier to negotiate with the buyer with one voice.
  Collin Wallace, the CEO of FanGo and angel investor,
raised this point from his personal experience with his first
exit. Grubhub, the acquirer, wanted a longer than typical
vesting schedule for Collin. As a result, “I tell any founder
who asks me for advice to hire a personal attorney,” he said.


190   //   E XIT RIGHT
   Remember that the company attorney represents the com-
pany and all shareholders—not you, the CEO. Collin went out
and hired his own personal attorney who then fought for the
contract he wanted. It’s really important to keep in mind that
your company attorney does not work for you, they work for
the shareholders. Sometimes that doesn’t matter, and some-
times it can be the difference of millions of dollars in your
pocket. Brad Feld agrees: “Founders should always get their
own counsel. Company counsel does not work for the found-
ers, but for the company. There will always be a moment in
the transaction where the company’s goals and incentives
will not be aligned with the founders’. This doesn’t have to be
a contentious moment, but having separate counsel makes it
cleaner to work through.”
  You have a lot more leverage now to make sure you are all
in. It doesn’t help anyone to close a deal with frustration on
either side, and that brings us to the final point.


DON’T GO TO BED (OR CLOSE THE DEAL) ANGRY

Do you view life and transactions like a zero-sum game where
winning is only defined by how much money you make, to
the exclusion of others? Is your complete focus on maxi-
mizing this transaction without thought to further oppor-
tunities down the line? Do you plan to not be a part of the
acquiring company or leave at the first available moment? If


                  HOW T O K EEP Y OUR C AL M A S T HE CEO   //   191
yes, congratulations, you’re an asshole. We wish you well and
hope to never be sitting across the table from you in a future
transaction.
  Collin Wallace, a dynamic serial founder with battle scars
from his first acquisition in 2014, told us one of his biggest
inspirational texts for entrepreneurs is the book Finite and
Infinite Games.9 “That book is my model for how I think about
operating in business and life,” he continued. “I think for
entrepreneurs to be successful in this business we have to
understand the point of the game is to keep on playing, not
for the game to end.”
  And so, if you don’t already, we must insist that you con-
sider the value of personal relationships. If you want to start
off on the right foot with your new company, it’s a good rule
of thumb to try and craft a deal and manage a process that,
in the end, maintains the integrity, trust, and goodwill of the
people who participated in the transaction.




192   //   E XIT RIGHT
P A R T       3




CLOSING AND
INTEGRATING
FOR THE FUTURE

That’s it. You’ve kept your cool throughout the tension,
negotiated in good faith for a deal you are excited about,
and finally, the term sheet is signed from both sides.
This is a great feeling, and it is definitely a moment to
celebrate.
   At this point, everyone around the table is hoping
for a straightforward process to get the transaction
across the finish line. As long as the closing documents
reflect what is on the term sheet, the majority of the
  shareholders should approve the transaction and the
  deal will formally happen.
      While most signed term sheets result in a closed deal,
  that doesn’t mean a deal is done by default. As we know,
  in life, shit happens.
      Just because you are here doesn’t mean you are
  across the finish line—far from it. Keep in mind that if the
  deal falls apart, little changes in the buyer’s world. Sure,
  some people might lose their influence or get a negative
  performance review, but life goes on.
      In your case, this could be the end of the journey. This
  is not a friendly period; the deal is vulnerable to changes
  in the market, your performance, and everything in
  between. Until the documents are signed, and the pay-
  ment hits your bank account, you need to be ready to call
  it off if things aren’t progressing as expected.
      Let the lawyers focus on the legal points while you
  efficiently work through the business issues. Know that
  the teams you have hired get paid regardless of the deal
  closing, so the incentive to close needs to be driven by
  the business stakeholders.
      The following chapters are your step-by-step guide
  to getting the deal closed, while preparing yourself for
  a successful integration. This is the final grade on the
  acquisition. It all comes down to how well you can inte-
  grate your people, product, and profits.



194   //   E XIT RIGHT
   It is your responsibility to take care of your team when
the dust settles, both in terms of them getting their fair
share as well as their roles in the parent company. There
is a sacred trust between you and your team, and this is
the true test to make sure you go to bat for them.
   Life on the other side can be wonderful, and this
remaining part is to show you how to get there. A FAIR
process will pay its final dividends here; you are set up
for a smooth close and a new beginning under a new
umbrella.




       CL O SING AND IN T EGR AT ING F OR T HE FU T UR E   //   195
C H A P T E R      1 0


HOW TO GET FROM A
SIGNED TERM SHEET
TO THE CLOSE




I
 n the dozens of interviews we conducted in
  the making of this book, not one of the founders’ trans-
  actions went perfectly smoothly. There are always bumps
  in the road. We heard about an investor who was named
as part of the Mueller investigation during the Trump presi-
dency and had all their assets frozen, the federal government
unexpectedly saying no to Comcast acquiring Time Warner
Cable, inept or overreaching attorneys putting deals in
jeopardy, and everything in between. There are always unfore-
seen challenges that can sink any deal, no matter the size.
   Unpredictable circumstances can come from anywhere.
You can focus all your time and attention on a transaction and
before you know it, you’ve taken your eye off the ball. Your
company starts losing customers or misses a key technology
deliverable. There can be rogue investors or board members
who have their own agenda, or key employees who have you
over the proverbial barrel to sweeten the deal for them.
  A pause in the deal proceedings might have absolutely
nothing to do with you. The acquiring company could have
a CEO change (happens all the time) and the new CEO has
different priorities. Your business champion can leave the
company. You may fall on the wrong side of internal politics
between competing camps from the acquiring company. Or
simply, the acquiring company’s priorities shift, for what-
ever reason.
   Forget your company or the acquiring company. Challenges
can come from external threats like a stock market crash,
government regulators, or acts of God. For crying out loud,
who saw COVID-19 coming? Let’s face it, life is messy.
  A healthy dose of paranoia is welcome at this stage. A FAIR
deal is elusive to put together, and easy to lose without focus.
Let’s delve into some of the things that can go wrong between
a signed term sheet and the closing day.




198   //   E XIT RIGHT
UNPREDICTABLE MARKET CIRCUMSTANCES
MAKE DEALS FALL THROUGH

At this point, the most common reason for things to steer in
the wrong direction is simple: the buyer essentially changes
their mind; the deal doesn’t make sense anymore. This could
have nothing to do with your performance. The issue is that
the buyer is going through a crisis. Maybe their stock price is
taking a hit, or there is controversy in the media. Remember
that in the month leading up to Adam Neumann’s very pub-
lic collapse as CEO of WeWork—and the immediate reversal
of the company’s fortunes—they had been in active talks
with a number of smaller companies to acquire them. Suffice
to say, those deals did not close. And there was nothing
those startup CEOs could have done to change the outcome.
It’s important to keep in mind that there are forces beyond
our control.
  It takes six to eight weeks for final documents to mature
for signatures. For simpler technology deals, this is much
faster. Employees and complicated ownership structures
slow the process down. The deal is vulnerable in this time
period; essentially the assumptions that gave way to making
this deal possible need to stay constant right now.
  While it is impossible to predict the future, it is possible to
align on expectations. Understand your rationale inside and
out and ensure that the buyer is in a stable period.


                  A SIGNED T ER M SHEE T T O T HE CL O SE   //   199
CLEAN OUT THE SKELETONS IN THE CLOSET—
THEY CAN COME BACK TO HAUNT YOU

Startups are messy. Lack of experienced management, lack of
time and resources, and sloppy management shows up in dif-
ferent ways. This is nothing to be embarrassed about, rather
something that the founders need to start fixing as early as
possible in the process (and in a transparent manner).
  This is part of what can be a painful discovery and due dil-
igence process. You will go a long way to ensuring your deal
closes by meticulously listing all of the open-source libraries
used in the product, ensuring that all enterprise customers
have signed agreements and renewal contracts, cleaning up
employee documents to make sure everyone has transferred
their IP rights, having employment agreements in place,
maintaining a consistent shareholder structure, and keeping
well-documented shareholder agreements.
  We discussed the importance of the data room, and why
it matters to keep it organized as part of good management
practices. Even with the most experienced management
teams, it is understandable to have things fall through the
cracks. It is OK to have skeletons in the closet, as long as you
are transparent with the problem and act swiftly to resolve it.
  What happens if you discover that an employee from a
long time ago never completed their separation agreement?
As a founder, you might be inclined to look the other way,


200   //   E XIT RIGHT
and hide an embarrassing blunder. Surely, the legal team isn’t
going to be stuck on one signature. Trust us, they will.
   When you uncover an issue like this, no matter how small,
make a big deal out of it. Bring it up in the daily stand-up
as something you just discovered. Be honest, talk through
exactly what you are doing to track down the solution, and
take the problem seriously. This will likely lead to the buyer
softening up on their requirements instead of the other way
around. If a corporate development executive senses that you
are avoiding the issue, they will double down and hang the
agreement on your ability to track down an elusive signature.
No side wants to have a problem down the line, and it is crit-
ical to have a clean sheet in the beginning of the relationship.
   We can’t emphasize this enough: a missing signature from
an offer letter, an incomplete customer contract, and other
seemingly small details can tank deals! Not that the buyer is
worried about the employee walking away or the customer
canceling the services, it indicates that there are bigger
secrets that the founders are hiding. Whether this is true or
not, perception is reality.
   Facebook’s policy is to walk away from deals if these kinds
of issues are discovered during due diligence. For instance,
a routine step in every diligence process is to list out each
employee and their immigration status. Compliance with
employment laws is a much greater liability from the buyer’s
perspective, so any missteps here are a huge deal.


                   A SIGNED T ER M SHEE T T O T HE CL O SE   //   201
   Imagine if a buyer signed a term sheet with a startup that
had one employee who was still working with an expired
H-1B visa. Even worse, what if the founder knew about this
problem and had actively decided to not disclose it ahead of
time? If you can’t trust a leader to be forthright with issues,
how will they fare inside their new home? Will they also
sweep problems under the rug, hoping that they never esca-
late? The point here is that the immigration challenges would
not have been a deal breaker; after all, seasoned buyers have
swarms of HR pros who can fix the situation. The issue is lost
trust. As we pointed out earlier, once the trust bank account
is withdrawn, it stays empty for a while.
   Don’t put yourself in this situation. Keep your closet orga-
nized, and if issues arise, over-communicate. Deals die because
of under-communication, rarely the other way around.


LOSING A CHAMPION TANKS MOMENTUM

This is an even tougher one to swallow: what if your executive
champion suddenly decides to leave, or even worse, is fired in
the middle of a transaction?
  There are two key stakeholder relationships in every deal
that must be preserved from start to finish: the business unit
leader and the executive champion. Consider the startup
sale as the ultimate business-to-business deal in the com-
pany’s history. The business unit leader is the user, and the


202   //   E XIT RIGHT
executive champion is the buyer. Without one, the other is
useless. A buyer won’t risk the capital with subsequent exe-
cution; a user won’t have the clout to get a deal done without
purchasing power.
   Long-term relationships come into play here, as you are
trusting your buyer-side counterpart with your destiny during
the sale process and you deserve trust and transparency. A
buyer with integrity won’t begin a process if they are on loose
footing, and you shouldn’t be working with executives who
don’t know they are in trouble to begin with. These kinds of
issues are easy to mask short-term, but a long-standing rela-
tionship will breed the trust to have an off-the-record conver-
sation about where things stand in the world of the buyer.
   Fundamentally, this is about alignment. If a stakeholder
departs the process unexpectedly, call an all-hands with the
remaining stakeholders from the buyer’s side. Ensure that
the deal is still on and give them space up front if they decide
to back away. You would much rather pause the process now
and let things settle down than force the deal through with-
out the stakeholder. The missing stakeholder is either imme-
diately replaced by another executive from the buyer’s side,
or they weren’t necessary to begin with. It is a huge red flag
to see inaction from the buyer’s side on this.
  You might also find that through the process you lose
allies on your own side. If a rushed process leaves you out of
alignment with your shareholders and they go rogue, things


                   A SIGNED T ER M SHEE T T O T HE CL O SE   //   203
get tricky. A disgruntled investor who is refusing to sign the
closing documents in protest can cause much bigger issues
down the road. It is entirely possible that the investor can
reach above the CEO directly to the buyer, signaling their dis-
comfort. It will be much easier for the buyer to walk away at
that stage to avoid a future lawsuit; buyers are extremely risk
averse towards the future.
  An investor who is refusing the sale of a company when
the majority have given their consent is a toxic business part-
ner. However, the shares they own in the company entitle
them to rights that they purchased, and you have to honor
that contract as the CEO. These kinds of issues have to be
dealt with ahead of time—much earlier than the kickoff of
the sale.
   On the other hand, we have seen lots of examples where
the buyers refuse to sign the documents the day of closing
the deal. These are the results of problems much earlier in
the process, and left to fester, these problems escalate to deal
breakers. It is imperative to never be blindsided by the nec-
essary approval process internally prior to final signatures
from the buy side to avoid these hiccups.


ELEVENTH HOUR CHANGES MAKE ALL PARTIES FEEL SOUR

No surprises for both sides should be the motto in the last two
weeks before signatures. Unfortunately, this is not always


204   //    E XIT RIGHT
the case. We have seen examples from both sides of the table
where either the buyers or the sellers request last-minute,
material changes. This is a classic blunder that trades short-
term gain for long-term issues.
  The most egregious version of this is price renegotiation—
and this is the easiest way to lose the deal altogether. Founders
may point out that their recent growth wasn’t appropriately
priced-in and the deal took too long to put together; the buy-
ers may highlight issues uncovered in diligence. To each party,
they are doing what they believe is fair. It isn’t. Perception is
reality, and there is no way to avoid coming off insincere with
a material change request.
  This is why regular, immediate communication of issues
is essential. In general, a problem should not show up in the
documents before it is discussed. The very nature of a mate-
rial change means that the crucial element of alignment is
now missing, and losing that in the tail end of the process
spells disaster. As the leader, it’s your responsibility to bite
the bullet—if the issue has not been brought up until the sig-
nature process, you will have to live with it. No side should
hold the deal hostage over already-negotiated terms.
  You must avoid this behavior at all costs, otherwise risk
giving up the FAIR status of the deal. Even if you get the price
increase, is it worth losing trust of the buyer? What if that
extra amount comes out of future resources made available
inside the parent company? The bill comes due always, and


                   A SIGNED T ER M SHEE T T O T HE CL O SE   //   205
the long-term nature of these engagements will make sure
that the problems stashed away today will rear their ugly
heads in the near future.
   In parallel on the acquirer’s side, squeezing the founders
on compensation or holdback periods is also a terrible idea at
the last minute. A bitter leader will not stick around, no mat-
ter the upside. Far worse than losing talent, they will stick
around and be disengaged.
  Although there are ways that a deal can die at this phase,
you will always be better off in assuming good intent. Push
forward as if the deal is going to go through and these will be
your partners. That positive attitude will help the integration
and growth phase that is so critical post-closing.




206   //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R      1 1


HOW SHOULD THE CEO
TAKE CARE OF THE TEAM?




B
      eing an entrepreneur is a deeply emotional
      and fraught experience. It’s risky to bet on yourself and
      take the less-traveled path. This is your dream, your
      baby, your sacrifice. Oftentimes you’ve risked every-
thing, including important personal relationships, to reach
this point. This is your moment of triumph where all the pain
and the trips on the emotional roller coaster are finally going
to pay off. You’ve certainly earned the moment to enjoy the
spoils of all your labor…but remember, you’re not alone and
you didn’t do this by yourself.
   Now is the time to be magnanimous. Think past yourself
and expand your vision outside of your personal needs. You
must not only remember all those whose incredible hard work
helped get you to this point, but also those who may want to
join you on your next adventure—whatever and whenever
that might be. As VCs, our eyes and ears perk up when we
come across a company where the CEO and their executive
team have had an exit and then, together as a group, start
their next company. That speaks volumes about the team and
how they work together.
   How you treat your team matters. It’s so easy to be selfish,
to rationalize how deserving you are—but don’t succumb
to the greed of the moment. We like to say that true char-
acter comes out in the extremes when there is either a lot,
or very little, money to distribute. In our interviews with
CEOs and stakeholders, we heard plenty of stories of leaders
who fought for their team and took less for themselves, and
exactly the opposite—where the CEO maximized their own
gains and didn’t share with the team or fight for their needs.
   The legal documents are important. They are the true north
of how distributions are made, and they should be followed to
the letter in the spirit of fairness and transparency. If the right
thing to do does not match the legal documents, discuss chang-
ing the documents in transparency with all parties. If you feel
that the distribution isn’t fair, then you can always take less and
give more to your employees. No one will stop you (especially if


208   //   E XIT RIGHT
you are not taking away from your other shareholders). Don’t
take refuge in the empty argument of, “Well, that’s what the
documents say.” That’s not a good enough excuse. If the docs
are wrong, morally or otherwise, change them.
  When Kevin Systrom sold Instagram to Facebook,
Instagram was still a small company. Kevin walked away with
over $400 million, while most of his employees received rela-
tively little from the transaction other than having Facebook
as their new employer. Only three employees had been there
long enough to vest Instagram shares. However, in order for
them to convert their shares to Facebook Restricted Stock
Units, they needed to pay $300,000. They weren’t all that
happy. It would have been easy for Kevin to have given each
$1 million. He wouldn’t have felt it, and it would have been
life-changing for each of them.
  As a matter of fact, it is common for founders to “make it
right” for their teams, even in stressful exits. Collin Wallace,
the Founder and CEO of FanGo, did exactly that. After sev-
eral years, FanGo sold to Grubhub for a modest return to
investors. When the company was first founded, Collin made
some promises of equity to early employees. But being a first-
time founder, those equity grants were never recorded appro-
priately. Legally, those equity promises did not exist.
  When it became time to sell the company, Collin quickly
recognized his mistake. He tried to get the board of direc-
tors to allocate shares to those employees, but no one was


       HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   209
willing to take less. So, Collin stepped up and did the honor-
able thing: he reduced his proceeds so that he could take care
of his employees and honor his word. He never thought twice.
It was the right thing to do.
   The world of entrepreneurship is small. We believe that in
the long run, people want to build companies with CEOs like
Collin, not Kevin. And of the two—we know which CEO we’d
rather be (or work for).


FINDING BALANCE IN THE WATERFALL BETWEEN
INVESTOR RETURNS AND EMPLOYEE RETENTION

There is inherent tension between the investors who have
been with you from the early days of your journey and the
incentives for the acquiring company. Your investors will
want to get paid as much as possible when the transaction
closes, while the acquiring company only cares about the
future possibilities of the two companies together. For the
investors, the value creation ends. For the acquirer, all the
value lies in the future.
   In order to maximize the value of the acquisition, in the
vast majority of the time, the acquiring company is going to
depend on the existing employees—and the critical knowl-
edge they uniquely possess—to stay with the company. The
acquirer is therefore incentivized to pay the employees more
to stay and give less to the investors, because they care about


210   //   E XIT RIGHT
the future and discount the past. Often the CEO is caught in
the precarious middle—a difficult terrain to navigate.
   According to the National Venture Capital Association
(NVCA), over 67 percent of the companies who take in ven-
ture capital money pay back less than 100 percent of the cap-
ital received at the time of an exit. Think about that: over 67
percent fail. Let’s bucket outcomes into three categories:


  1. A major win for investors of 5x+ returns
  2. A modest win of 1–4x
  3. Return pennies on the dollar to zero to investors


Major wins are pretty rare and usually mean happy days
for all parties. While there might be some grumbling from
a shareholder or two about the retention plan for employ-
ees (involving both future equity as well as cash incentives),
everyone is getting a nice payday and there are usually pretty
few squabbles. Your job as CEO is to be in constant commu-
nication with all parties—your shareholders, employees, and
acquiring company—and make sure that everyone is (mostly)
satisfied with the outcome. Being in the middle is never easy,
but if you are FAIR, open, and transparent about the logic
and reasoning, then it should be pretty straightforward.


Modest wins are a little harder from the investor perspective.
There is typically a mixture of relief after a long and arduous


       HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   211
road, and they are glad to come out a little better than whole.
Your deal won’t return their fund, but it puts some points on
the board and it lets them save face. Most VCs will say thank
you, take their money, and be glad to move on to the next one.
   Unfortunately, there are some VCs who think the world is
a zero-sum game and that they need to maximize their gains
from each and every deal. These short-sighted investors will
want to squeeze every last penny out of a deal—sometimes
to the detriment of their fellow investors and, most certainly,
the employees. These VCs don’t care about tomorrow, they
live in the moment. Hopefully, you don’t have investors that
look like this, but if you do, this is where you have to be tough
and fight for your employees.
   You and the acquiring company are still going to depend
upon your key employees to stay with the company
post-transaction and continue to pour their hearts and souls
into the company. They are going to need to be compensated
for all their past efforts as well as incentivized to stay.
   In the middle of a difficult negotiation, what would happen
if the final sale price were a few million less to the sharehold-
ers and instead that money went into an employee retention
plan? How would your shareholders feel? This is where trust
comes in. Your shareholders have to believe in their hearts
that you are fighting for their best interests as hard as you are
fighting for yours and your employees’. They have to believe
in you and your judgment that the best way to maximize the


212   //   E XIT RIGHT
deal and outcome is to find a balance between everyone’s
needs. This won’t be easy. Regular, open, and transparent
communication is essential to making everyone feel good
about the outcomes.
   Human nature can often stray to the dark side. When
investors don’t know what’s going on, they can sometimes
assume the worst. Don’t let doubt fester. Your job is to always
build trust. Once again, trust is the lubricant that can ease
tensions and help get deals over the finish line.


A loss for your investors hurts. Everyone is frustrated. No
one feels great. An emotional stew of anger, anxiety, and even
some relief that this is all finally over, mix together and cast a
shadow. It’s OK to be disappointed. But don’t take yourself out
of the arena just yet. Stay sharp and stay purpose driven. How
you handle the loss will determine a lot of what happens next.
   First, don’t be embarrassed. You gave it your all. Lessons
have been learned, and you will be smarter and wiser the next
time around.
  This is where you have to stiffen your spine. Hopefully,
you have found a good home for your company and your
employees. Your investors are already only getting pennies
on their dollars invested. While most will be sanguine, some
will be pissed and will look askew at every penny that is going
towards employees and not into their pockets. This is a del-
icate balancing act. There is not a lot of money to go around.


        HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   213
In order to make this transaction work, your key employees
will need to stay with the new company and be taken care of.
   Do your best. Be sure to get advice from mentors you trust.
A great strategy is to share the decision-making on this subject
with someone the investor group trusts. It would be awesome
if you had an ally on the board. It might be your lead inves-
tor—or an independent board member—who can off-load
some of the pressure and champion the deal alongside you.


THE GOLDEN RULE OF TRANSPARENCY

CEOs must be increasing in transparency as the deal pro-
gresses in certainty. A great Scott Wald saying is, “My old
pappy used to say, undone deals get undone.” Or as we say
here in Chicago, “It ain’t over until the fat lady sings.”
   As you go along the process, your absence as CEO will be
noticed and felt, key employees will be brought into the due
diligence process for either financial or technical reviews, and
word will start to leak out.
   The most precious commodity you have is the trust
between you and your key executives and employees and
with your investors and shareholders. You don’t want to
raise expectations that you ultimately can’t deliver upon,
nor do you want to spring a major surprise on people. There
is an art to finding the balance to both downplay expecta-
tions towards the beginning of a process and gradually keep


214   //   E XIT RIGHT
your stakeholders informed as deals increase in their likeli-
hood of closing.
   Transparency also leads to building confidence in your
judgment and gives you an opportunity to solicit feedback
and help during the inevitable bumps in the road. Be pru-
dent and judicious, but don’t lose the opportunity to build
trust and solicit help in key moments. At the end of the day,
use the Golden Rule and treat people like you yourself would
like to be treated. Bottom line is you must trust your team.
They got you this far; you can trust them to take you to the
finish line.
   The best time to negotiate with an employee is before they
become one. Negotiating one-off deals with key employees,
especially in the midst of an ongoing sale process, is to be
avoided at all costs.
   As we’ve discussed, going through the process of selling
your company is emotionally fraught and difficult for even
the most stoic leaders. Tempers flare and anxieties take
hold—not just for you, but also for your key employees.
   If they are aware of the sales process (and if they are clas-
sified as key employees in the negotiation, then they should
be!), they will have a dozen urgent and confusing questions
cycling in their minds: Will I have a decent payout? Am I
being treated fairly relative to my peers? Is my job safe? What
will I be doing at the acquiring company? Do I even want to
stay, regardless of incentives?


        HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   215
   If key employees perceive they are not being dealt with
fairly, they can hold up negotiations and even kill deals with
intransigence and unrealistic demands. Trust us, it can get
really ugly fast.
   You’ll want to keep these rules in mind:


  1. Get your legal paperwork in order. Every single
           employee should sign an employment agreement
           that assigns all their intellectual property to the
           company on their first day on the job. No ifs, ands,
           or buts. This is crucial. And if you don’t have this in
           place, calmly put this book down and fix it.


  2. All employee agreements have to be signed, stored
           safely, and accounted for in a digital data room. If
           you are looking for a signed employee agreement
           during the transaction, it’s too late. You are
           wasting your attorney’s time trying to track them
           down, and it will make you look like an amateur
           to the acquiring company. Most importantly, it
           will allow a key employee to have leverage over
           you as they know the transaction won’t close
           unless they sign. Too many deals have been
           held up and blackmailed by a key employee who
           wouldn’t sign an employment agreement without
           further consideration. The best way to avoid this


216   //    E XIT RIGHT
    situation is to not put yourself into that position
    in the first place.


3. Assume nothing you do is confidential. If you are
    forced to cut a special sweetheart deal for a key
    employee to come along, you can pretty much
    assume that eventually it will come out and other
    employees won’t be happy that they did not get the
    same deal.


4. Create alignment with your executive team and key
    employees before you start the process of trying to
    sell your company. Sharing this news at the beginning
    of the process can be precarious, and you’ll need
    to carefully weigh the factors and personalities
    involved in your particular situation. Because selling
    your company is all-consuming, you need to keep
    your team focused on running the company and
    making sure all necessary balls stay in the air. At the
    same time, some of your key employees will need
    to participate in key moments of the due diligence
    process. Take the time to sit down with each key
    employee and run through your FAIR criteria. Explain
    the rationale behind the decision and your vision for
    success, and be ready to answer some basic questions
    about what their job and/or outcome might look like.


    HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?    //   217
           If they have major issues, this conversation is the time
           for them to raise them. The earlier key employees are
           on board with the decision and are comfortable with
           what it means for them, the more you’ll be able to
           count on them steering the ship ahead, and the harder
           it will be for them to try to renegotiate at the final
           hour and hold the deal hostage.


  Sometimes you don’t have any choice, but if you have run
a FAIR and transparent process, built trust with your team,
remained generous with their payouts, and painted a future
where you continue to be excited to work together, then you
shouldn’t have to make any special exceptions or have to
renegotiate deals at the eleventh hour.


NEGOTIATING COMPENSATION FOR TEAM AND
EXECUTIVES: INCENTIVES AND HOLDBACK PERIODS

Nothing is more sensitive than compensation. It’s where the
rubber meets the road, and if not handled well, it will put the
health of the merger on the line. In a startup acquisition, com-
pensation is typically dictated by terms that include holdback
periods, where a portion of the proceeds of the company will
be distributed based on future results. Holdbacks, like equity
vesting, are important tools that the acquiring company uses
to incentivize merging employees and align the workforce


218   //    E XIT RIGHT
for a successful integration. Sometimes, performance-based
holdback terms can lead to a windfall of higher returns, or
conversely, they can be a serious limitation if the merger goes
sideways and the expected results aren’t delivered.
   Today Jason Seats is the Chief Investment Officer of the
global Techstars network. But in 2008, he was in the mid-
dle of negotiating the sale of his first startup, SliceHost, to
Rackspace. He negotiated performance-based tranches of
compensation that would be released based on certain mile-
stones. The first two earn-outs were related to integration
and the last tranche was tied to growth. This last term was
hotly debated, but finally both sides agreed to a growth num-
ber to hit within a four-year time frame. Jason’s team ended
up reaching the goal in eighteen months, but the timeline
and growth milestones were already set. “We shouldn’t have
put a cap on the milestone. We should have let it ride for the
whole vesting period and kept the meter running. We didn’t
have faith in ourselves to optimize our compensation.”
  This certainly is an upside example. Not all deals end this
way. The world is full of deals that get written off. If there is
a holdback of some of the deal value that is dependent upon
future results, then it is critical to make sure that you have in
writing all the resources that you will need to execute—and
if those resources are not provided then you still get the hold-
back. This is also a great moment (if you are the acquiring
company) to not make promises you can’t keep.


        HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   219
  The other things to pay extra special attention to are job
titles and pay grades. Most smaller companies don’t really
pay that much attention to pay grades. Trust us, larger com-
panies do, and this really matters. The difference between a
VP, SVP, and EVP can mean hundreds of thousands, or even
millions. of dollars in comp and options. We highlighted this
in the term sheet, but it bears repeating here: the difference
between a level-five engineer and a level-seven could have a
profound impact on someone’s career trajectory. Do not wait
until after the transaction to research this. It is your respon-
sibility to proactively work with the HR department of the
acquiring company and understand how they level and grade
each job. Then, on an individual basis, you need to work in
partnership with their HR team to make sure each of your
team is appropriately graded and leveled.
  This is a core component of the integration plan, and
without it, the deal terms will unlikely be FAIR. Ideally, this
happens before the final signatures are on the closing docu-
ments; the leverage you have for anyone other than the key
employees is greatly reduced on the other side of the deal.


EMBRACING “GOLDEN HANDCUFFS”
AS TOOLS FOR MUTUAL SUCCESS

It’s pretty simple: the acquiring company wants you and all
the key employees to stay as long as possible. Most of the


220   //   E XIT RIGHT
time, in addition to the intellectual property, the true asset
of any company is the people and the knowledge they have
about the product, the market, and the customers. Therefore,
most deals are constructed and engineered to place incen-
tives for people to stay longer and penalties if they leave early.
   In addition to withholding part of the proceeds of the sale
based on future performance benchmarks (as described in
the previous section), the acquiring company has three tools
at their disposal: how existing options vest, awarding new
options in the acquiring company, and creating new bonus
structures.
  The first thing you have to know is how your current stock
option plan is managed. The key, and most critical, issue is
what happens when a company is sold. Do the options all
vest immediately? This is called a single trigger. Or does some
portion vest upon the transaction (typically 50 percent) and
the remainder vest over a schedule, or if the employee is let
go post-transaction? This is also known as a double trigger.
   Most stock option plans are written with a double trigger.
Not surprisingly, this is the one place where the interests of
the VC align perfectly with the acquiring company. The VCs
know that the people are a very valuable asset to the acquir-
ing company, and they don’t want the employees to leave
immediately after a sale. Most stock option plans are writ-
ten with a double trigger to help keep employees from bolt-
ing. The current stock option plan is under your control, as


        HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   221
approved by your board of directors. You can’t rewrite your
own plan in the middle of a transaction.
  The real negotiating point is what future stock options in
the acquiring company are going to be awarded. The amount
and the vesting schedule are crucial. Typically, these shares
will be granted according to the existing stock option plan
of the acquiring company on their standard vesting schedule,
which is usually equal to four years. Some companies will try
and adjust the vesting schedules of these new shares to be lon-
ger than the standard plan. You have to be very thorough and
pay close attention. This is one of those “gotchas” that lawyers
throw in at the very last second towards the end of a transac-
tion. Smart CEOs bring this up during the negotiation process
and don’t wait until the end when all the momentum is to close
the deal and all the leverage is with the acquiring company.


NAVIGATING NONCOMPETES AFTER THE TRANSACTION

Lastly, the acquiring company is going to insist that you and
your executive team all sign noncompetes. Once again, they
will want it to be for as long as possible, and you will want to
keep it as short as you can. There are a few considerations to
keep in mind, such as:


  1. Will you keep on working with the acquiring
           company post-transaction?


222   //    E XIT RIGHT
  2. How significant a shareholder will you become in the
       acquiring company (typically the answer is too small
       to matter)?


  3. Do you care? Sometimes the payday is large enough,
       and you are so burned out, that you have zero
       desire to go and start something new—especially
       in that particular field. Sometimes, the fires are still
       burning, and you can’t wait for your next company to
       start. Know thyself. The more you are in touch with
       how you think about your future, the easier it is to
       negotiate what you want.


  The acquiring company can’t keep you on the sidelines
indefinitely and they are going to have to pay up in the form
of new consideration to keep you from starting something
new. A reasonable noncompete is twelve or eighteen months.
Depending upon the deal, it can even go up to two years.
  Who knows how you are going to feel in a couple of years
after the celebrations are over and your competitive juices
start flowing again? While each deal is unique, you should
definitely start pushing back if they are asking for a noncom-
pete greater than two years. Don’t be afraid to dig deeper and
ask questions about what they are trying to protect against.
If you feel the opposing deal attorney is being unreasonable,
don’t settle for them telling you that is what their client


       HOW SHOULD T HE CEO TAK E C AR E OF T HE T E AM?   //   223
wants, or this is their “standard” term. If you don’t like where
this is going, be sure to work in partnership with your deal
sponsor to fight on your behalf.




224   //   E XIT RIGHT
C H A P T E R      1 2


WHAT ARE THE KEYS
TO A SUCCESSFUL
INTEGRATION?




C
      ongratulations!         The    deal     has    finally
      closed. The rush of emotions is palpable. Going
      through the sale of your startup is an emotion ampli-
      fier. Happiness becomes intense joy. Frustrations eas-
ily spiral into anger and lashing out. Bonds of friendships
form even tighter, or you make new lifelong enemies. It’s
not just the intense last few months of trying to get this deal
closed—it’s the past decade or more of your life building this
company from scratch to get to this moment of triumph.
   Not every emotion you feel will be rosy. In the days follow-
ing SwipeSense’s deal closing, and right before the COVID-19
pandemic would upend our daily lives, we sat down at a cof-
fee shop. What was meant to be a celebratory conversation
quickly turned into an outpouring of emotions from Mert.
   His feelings were extreme. And they were all over the place.
He felt both elation and gratitude for an awesome moment
of success. He felt excitement about the possibilities of the
future and hope that he and his team would thrive in their
new home. And he felt nervous at the thought of no longer
being in control of his own destiny. Will it all turn out OK? he
wondered.
  The conversation we had that day—the wisdom that Mark
imparted to Mert and the space that Mert had to vent all his
excitement, fears, and frustrations—ultimately would lay
the foundation for this book.
   When we asked for his advice for founders’ mental health
after exits, Brad Feld had the following to say: “You have to
give yourself at least six months to feel your emotions. They
will be up, down, and all over the place. They will change daily.
Sometimes you won’t think about anything. Other days you’ll
obsess about little things. You’ll be disoriented. If it was a
graceful parting with a party, you likely have some closure.
If it was abrupt without a chance to say goodbye to people,
consider a comfortable and proactive way to do that and get
closure with the people you want to.”


226   //   E XIT RIGHT
  There is no correct way to feel, especially when you ran-
domly hear about the company, encounter a prior teammate,
or are told something indirectly that seems challenging, diffi-
cult, or just plain wrong. Instead of looking for “correct,” just
feel and acknowledge your feelings.
   If you are depressed or feel depleted, know that is normal.
Talk to peers who are founders of other companies and have
either sold or departed their business. Allow yourself to be
open about how you are feeling with those around you. Don’t
be ashamed and know that there is no fast way to “feel better.”
  Above all, make room for yourself. If you’ve had a financially
successful exit, you now have resources you didn’t have before.
If you need to earn money to pay for your day-to-day existence,
try to find an organization to join that you are excited about.
If you are starting a new company, embrace the newness of it.
   Most new companies fail. It takes brute force of vision and
personality to bend the arc of business success in your favor.
It’s OK to take a victory lap and bask a little in the glory. Any
exit, no matter the final number, means that you have beaten
the odds. Believe it or not, now comes the hard part. Time to
integrate into your new acquiring company. At this critical
juncture, your mindset is everything.
   Going into the integration with a bad attitude, having
silent resentments from a difficult transaction, and feeling
fatigued from a long process is a recipe for disaster. Whatever
baggage you have, it’s time to jettison. In order to make this


  W H AT AR E T HE K E Y S T O A SUC CE S SFUL IN T EGR AT ION?   //   227
transaction work, you will have to be optimistic, let go of past
issues, and find a way to bring excitement and hopefulness
towards starting a new chapter of your life. Think of this as
a new beginning with far greater resources at your disposal,
and not an end of an emotional roller coaster.
   Having met founders who have seen their companies
struggle after the exit in the course of writing this book, we
are struck by how surprisingly consistent their message is:
how you enter into this new relationship really matters as a
predictor of future success.
   The world is full of failed transactions, and a surefire way
to kill success is for leadership to exit. As you by now know,
we are big believers in taking the long view and actively man-
aging key relationships with your reputation.
   Now is a great time to stop and be thoughtful about how
you want to manage this next chapter in your life. The reper-
cussions of your actions now will leave a much bigger impact
on your legacy.
   Having sold a startup is one thing. Ensuring that it achieved
10x its potential under the new wing of the acquirer in a reason-
able amount of time is an entirely different matter. For starters,
it shows that the founder had exactly the right vision. Any new
VC evaluating a new investment in the founder will know that
there is a good chance that their capital will be taken care of.
   Furthermore, a successful integration typically means
that your team also landed on their feet. Making your team


228   //   E XIT RIGHT
rich is wonderful, but accomplishing greater heights together
is even better. Your greatest asset is the cohesive bond that
formed through trials and tribulations, strengthened by
things working out in the end.
  As a founder, nailing down integration might look like a
selfless act—the company has been sold and the responsi-
bility seemingly passed on to the buyer. It couldn’t be fur-
ther from the truth. For your long-term benefit, the smartest
thing to do is to make sure the company is successful even
without you around.


DEFINING SUCCESS METRICS AND THEIR OWNERSHIP
BEFOREHAND WILL SET THE RIGHT EXPECTATIONS

Success will look different to you personally once the trans-
action closes. Especially if the sale is FAIR, this means
life-changing sums of money for the founding team. This is
quite different from the humble beginnings of most technol-
ogy companies, and it’s a wonderful thing. New milestones
for you personally will mean that you are able to aim for
greater highs in the future. Just like how success has a new
definition for you personally, there is a new definition for vic-
tory for your startup, now part of a larger organization.
  As part of defining the rationale, we strongly recommend
that you carefully define what success looks like post-merger,
including the key metrics that measure it. This exercise


  W H AT AR E T HE K E Y S T O A SUC CE S SFUL IN T EGR AT ION?   //   229
should be conducted jointly with your deal sponsor and
champion. It’s imperative that you have alignment on these
expectations for everyone’s benefit.
  This exercise has two key steps. First, what are the key
metrics that define success? Second, and equally as import-
ant, what are the key resources necessary to execute towards
these metrics? The spirit of these steps is to ensure you can
deliver the goods you are held accountable for.
  Patrick Sullivan is a hard-charging New Yorker, with a bull-
in-a-china-shop personality, and when his last company was
acquired by Google, he used that personality to make sure
the transaction was a success.
  He had been promised a certain head count once he was
part of Google. Patrick knew the objectives he signed up for
were only possible with a bigger team, but the closing docs
didn’t spell out his budget (as is customary; otherwise deal
docs could get way too complicated).
  So, when his budget request was turned down, he ended
up getting in the face of a Google VP to let him know how he
really felt about the situation. (He subsequently got twelve
new engineers.)
  Patrick says, “You can’t take your hands off the wheel. If
you are going to be held accountable to certain objectives, so
are they.” Patrick treated Google like a customer, even after
his team was embedded there. They started an internal news-
letter so that they were always sharing their metrics and


230   //   E XIT RIGHT
news throughout the company. The team would spotlight
other divisions, which made people like them and look for-
ward to their updates. It was a constant reminder that they
were still there and still a force.


Typical Checklist for a Successful Integration—
Ask for the Playbook from the Acquirer
       Shared functions versus standalone subsidiary
       HR
       Finance—key metrics that matter, GAAP accounting,
       timing, and constraints
       Brand
       Sales
       Back office
       Budgeting and funding
       Clear designation of authority


THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR A SUCCESSFUL INTEGRATION
FALLS ON EVERYONE’S SHOULDERS

When you are selling to a larger company, it’s easy to think
that they have all the answers. That they have done this many
times before. All you have to do is sit back and let the pros
take over. We believe strongly that the responsibility for a
successful integration is equally shared between both par-
ties. There is much you can do proactively to help ensure a


  W H AT AR E T HE K E Y S T O A SUC CE S SFUL IN T EGR AT ION?   //   231
successful post-transaction for all. This is especially import-
ant if you have an earn-out, where a portion of the proceeds
of the transaction are based on the results post-transaction.
   Rishad Tobaccowala, the former Chief Strategy Officer of
Publicis, who led the acquisition of many companies under
his tenure, gives this piece of advice: “At the start of the new
relationship, imagine that it’s a year down the road and you
are writing your one-year-anniversary press release. Write
down all the things that went right and all the things that
went wrong. Then, go make a plan on how to ensure the
successes and mitigate the mistakes. If there are no sensi-
ble ways to avoid the bad things from happening, then don’t
proceed with the acquisition.”
   Founders have a special role to play. You are the leader, and
setting the tone from the top down has a huge impact. When
Alex White sold his company to Pandora, he took extra steps to
ensure that once the transition happened, they got out of the
“us” and “them” mentality. When someone on his team would
ask a question like, “How does Pandora do this?” he always
responded, “This is how we do it, because we are Pandora.”


MAINTAINING FAIR AFTER THE CLOSE IS CRITICAL

If you have followed our mantra through the process, you
will be in a fantastic place to kick off the relationship with
your acquiring company. However, the world is not static.


232   //   E XIT RIGHT
Business is constantly evolving. There are good quarters and
bad ones. Abundant resources, followed by hiring freezes or
layoffs. People come and go. Leadership and priorities can
shift. Your job is to constantly look at your new business
through the FAIR lens.


  • Validate fit: Are the new people you met in the parent
      company similar to ones throughout the exit process? Is
      the culture what you assumed? Are your people happy?


  • Keeping alignment: As you encounter post-close
      success and setbacks, do you still have good alignment
      with key leadership? Is your internal champion still
      your advocate? Are there any hidden detractors, and
      how do you win them over?


  • Completing integration: Is the integration going to
      plan? Are the resources promised being delivered? If
      not, what steps do you need to course-correct? What
      can you do proactively, and where do you need to ask
      for help?


  • Achieving the rationale: And most importantly, is the
      original rationale for the merger still holding up over
      time? Is your vision greater than how you started the
      relationship?


  W H AT AR E T HE K E Y S T O A SUC CE S SFUL IN T EGR AT ION?   //   233
   Be honest and objective with yourself as you think through
and evaluate these questions. It’s fine if the answers aren’t what
you thought they would be—life changes. Your job is to give it
your all for as long as you are working towards a FAIR outcome.
   Here’s a truth about most of us founders. Many of us may
have started our own companies to create wealth, but even more
importantly, we wanted to be our own boss. We wanted opera-
tional freedom. We didn’t want anyone else telling us what to
do. After the transaction closes, you most certainly have a new
boss, along with a new board of directors. As if those were not
enough, pair that with a much larger bureaucracy to find your
way around. Bonus points if it’s a public company, then there are
outside shareholders that your new CFO is laser-focused on pla-
cating. In some ways, this is much more direct and straightfor-
ward—no guessing as to whom you need to work with. In other
ways, this is a significantly more complicated world to navigate.
   It’s easy to give up and say to heck with it; I’ve got some
cash in my pocket; adios, amigos! When those feelings arise,
remember that your customers are depending upon you.
Your employees who helped get you here and stuck with you
through thick and thin are depending upon you. If there are
still earn-outs or money held in escrow, your shareholders
are depending on you to make sure you are there to help fight
for its eventual distribution.
  This is the part where reputation and relationships matter.
It’s time to return to the strategy of playing a long game. How


234   //   E XIT RIGHT
you leave a job is every bit as important as how you begin one.
You need to do everything you can to solve whatever issues
you may be having with the new company. Time to grow up,
both as a founder and an executive.
  This is easier said than done, so below are a handful of
frameworks to work through post-close challenges.


COMMON GROUND IN SHARED VALUES
TO RESOLVE CONFLICT

When teaching at Kellogg School of Management at North-
western University, we like to ask the question, “What is your
favorite smell from childhood?” It doesn’t matter what coun-
try you come from, the color of your skin, the culture you were
brought up in, whether you are a conservative or liberal, or if
you are in a different department or division than ours—every
single person on the planet has a favorite smell from childhood.
  It’s something that is universal. When you go around a
room and ask everyone to share their favorite smell, it always
elicits smiles and nods of familiarity. That’s the secret. Once
you get to know someone, even a little bit, they no longer
become the “other.” Without thinking of strangers as compe-
tition, you are given the freedom to make decisions that are
best for everyone. You can think of other people, ask for their
help, and navigate the future with everyone’s best interests
in mind. When you don’t do that, when you continue to see


  W H AT AR E T HE K E Y S T O A SUC CE S SFUL IN T EGR AT ION?   //   235
your new partners as the “other,” bad things will emerge. Us
versus them never ends on good terms.
   So now that you are on the other side, remove the con-
cept of us versus them. Remember that you are now one
unit. Focus on the values that you share; they are like smells
from your childhood that each of you have. These values are
the foundation of what made “Fit” possible; they will still be
there once the deal is over the finish line.
   Start with the assumption of good intent. If someone
is acting in a way that is not helpful or counterproductive,
pause and take a moment to ask yourself why they are acting
like they are, and assume they have good intentions—unless
proven otherwise.
   If you start with the assumption of good intent, what fol-
lows naturally is giving them the benefit of the doubt. We
all have been in relationships that were highly political, each
side measuring their words carefully for the fear of being
backstabbed. What about the opposite?
   It’s incredible to have trust and openness in the core of
the relationship, where you feel everyone has each other’s
back. It’s clear which relationship is worth building towards.
Reciprocating trust and benefit of the doubt from the
start doesn’t make you weak, it generates camaraderie and
dependability.
   If the deal wasn’t as successful as you thought it could be,
it’s easy to begin the new relationship with a head of steam,


236   //   E XIT RIGHT
a chip on your shoulder, and thinking you have a lot to prove.
If the sale was successful, your new company just paid you
a life-changing sum of money to start working together. In
either case, now is the time to take a deep breath, be humble,
and navigate with grace.
   No matter whom you end up working with, open your eyes
and pay attention to what made your acquirer really success-
ful. No matter what the company is like, you can learn a lot
from them.
  Think in a longer time horizon, invest the most in your
reputation and your relationships.
   Finally, play the long game. Most founders don’t stop
with their first venture. You are hopefully going to be around
for many more decades to come. How you treat people will
always be remembered. Your reputation precedes you and
lingers after you for a long time.
  There’s a Yiddish term that we like: be a “mensch.” Treat
people with kindness and respect. Honor your promises.
Build relationships that go deep; avoid transactional ones.
Always have a no-assholes rule. Life is too short to deal with
people that you don’t share values with.
   Be the person that your children would be proud of.




  W H AT AR E T HE K E Y S T O A SUC CE S SFUL IN T EGR AT ION?   //   237
E P I L O G U E


MOST OF THE JOURNEY
IS STILL AHEAD




We hope you have enjoyed reading this book as much as we
have enjoyed writing it. It has been such an honor to learn
from and with such great business leaders, entrepreneurs,
transaction attorneys, and corp dev leaders, and to share our
collective stories with you. This book is both a practical guide
of best practices and frameworks, as well as aspirational, gen-
tle coaching to think in the longer term with encouragement
to focus on the legacy of your actions. We’d like to leave you
with some final thoughts.
DON’T MAKE SERIOUS FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS
FOR AT LEAST SIX MONTHS AFTER THE CLOSE

Brad Feld wrote eloquently in his book Startup Life his advice
on what to do when you find yourself staring at your check-
ing account and there is more money in there than you ever
imagined.
   His simple guidance is to not do anything for at least six
months. “People will come out of the woodwork to help you—
financial advisors, friends, family, and other successful entre-
preneurs who have already been through a big exit of their
own. The advice will come fast and furiously, and you will feel
the pressure to figure out where to put the money, how to
invest it, and whom to hire to help you. Don’t succumb to
this pressure.”10
  According to Brad, there is no way to filter out who has
your best intentions at heart. Some will be there to genuinely
help; some will be there for themselves. We agree, financial
advisors can simply see a new client with little experience,
or family members might view you as deep pockets that can
help bail them out of their financial challenges.
   Simply put, by taking a deliberate break from making a
decision, you can collect data dispassionately, seeing what
the landscape entails, and letting the emotions settle before
you start making commitments.




240   //   E XIT RIGHT
BE HONEST WITH YOURSELF ABOUT YOUR TRACK RECORD

Your track record will depend upon the point of view of who
is looking at it. Remember, you have multiple stakeholders.


   • Your investors will look at how much they received
     at the time of closing and how you looked after their
     interests during the process. Be honest with yourself
     (assuming you would want to work with them again);
     how willing will they be to back you in your next
     company?


   • Your employees will see how generous you were at the
     time of closing; did you go to bat to protect their jobs
     during the transition and fight for their rights inside
     the new company? Will they come work for you again?
     What is the future value of working together with a
     team that you trust?


   • The corp dev leader and the person who championed
     the deal to acquire you, how will they look at this
     deal with the perspective of time? Did they stake
     their reputation on doing your deal? Was it a feather
     in their cap, or something to be ashamed of? Do you
     think they will want to do business with you again in
     the future?


                                            EP IL OGUE   //   241
  There’s the story you tell everyone, and then there’s the
real story of how others feel about you. Do everything in your
power to ensure that those stories are one and the same.


IMPROVE THE M&A PROCESS OF YOUR ACQUIRING COMPANY

No transaction is perfect. There are always ways to improve
the process. This is actually how this book got started. Mert
went through a transaction with several learning moments.
Mark coached him to write them down, in the spirit of shar-
ing these learnings with his new company. So that (at the
appropriate time) when they make their next transaction, it
can go smoother for everyone.
  We like to map out every process both functionally and—
even more importantly—through the lens of an emotional
roadmap. You’ve heard of a product roadmap? Do the exact
same thing but map out the emotions. How does the recipi-
ent on the other end feel in each step of the process/journey?
It’s an incredibly useful exercise to go through. How do you
want people to “feel” as they go through an M&A experience
with your company?
  Remember to be humble. Not everyone is open to feed-
back. In the spirit of trying to improve their process, because
you have fresh eyes (and sometimes raw feelings), you can
provide valuable insights in the spirit of making it better for
the next transaction.


242   //   E XIT RIGHT
  When you leave, leave well.
  Look, we understand, most entrepreneurs aren’t built to
be in larger companies. Going from being your own boss to
chafing against a rigid bureaucracy takes some getting used
to. We urge you to be patient. Larger companies have much
they can teach you—so hang in there for as long as you can
and—importantly—as long as you are contractually commit-
ted to do so. Hang in there for your employees and customers
who are depending upon you.
  But sometimes you just have to go. And when you leave…
leave well. Be open. Be transparent. Give plenty of notice. For
goodness’s sake, whatever you do, try your hardest never to
burn bridges. Maintain the integrity of those relationships
you care about, and ensure your reputation is solid and that
you can hold your head high.


RELATIONSHIPS MATTER; TURNS WAY MORE THAN YOU THINK

Who knows what your future will hold? With a successful
track record, some money in the bank, and some real oper-
ating knowledge and wisdom, where will that take you?
Whatever path(s) you end up pursuing, you can bet that
some of the people that you have interacted with in this com-
pany will intersect with you again down the road.
  As VCs, we love to see exec teams who worked together
previously, had a successful exit, and through that pressure


                                            EP IL OGUE   //   243
cooker, bonded to the extent that they want to continue
on together, as a team. Really says a lot about the quality
of trust between them and the mutual confidence in each
other’s abilities.
   Investors love to invest in people they already know and
trust. Corp dev leaders like to invest in people they trust.
Strategic channel partners like to partner with companies
led by people they trust. See a pattern here…? Relationships
really matter. It is one of your principal assets. Manage this
asset like anything else that is precious to you. You will be
shocked how often you will run into people today somewhere
in your future.


PAY IT FORWARD AND BE GENEROUS OF TIME AND SPIRIT

You just had an exit. Hopefully, a life-changing event for you
and your family. You took huge risks. Worked your ass off.
Your actions put you in the position to finally cash out. The
truth is, as we talked to dozens of CEOs—and as we have
experienced ourselves—there is also an element of luck and
timing involved. Karma just smiled down upon you. Now is
the time to smile back.
   Our collective job is to pay it forward. To make this world
better off than we found it. Be a mentor to a struggling entre-
preneur. You will have so much wisdom, insight, and real-
world experience to share. Open up your network to help


244   //   E XIT RIGHT
others. To the extent you can, invest back into deserving
entrepreneurs. You are now part of the flywheel of success
that begets success.


STAY HUMBLE AND GROUNDED

After having sold your company, you are flooded with many
intense and competing emotions, and if it was a successful
exit, then you are probably feeling pretty good about your-
self. You want to climb the highest hill and shout out to the
world at the top of your lungs, “Fuck you, world, I did it!” You
should absolutely do that…in the shower, to yourself. Go
ahead and indulge yourself and let it rip. It will feel great.
   Out there in the real world, you will be asked often to tell
your story. It will be so tempting to start off with the words,
“Well, I…” Stop yourself. Practice the following… “It was a team
effort. So many people to thank who made this possible…”
   Additionally, we urge you to think carefully about court-
ing or encouraging publicity. It’s no one’s business how much
money you made, and there can be unintended consequences
from broadcasting that information widely. When Mark sold
Kinesoft to SoftBank in 1995, his neighbor was a journalist
for the Chicago Tribune and asked to interview him about it.
Next thing you know, the article is the front page of the busi-
ness section, and his wife and family were caught off guard by
the family’s business that was now being talked about among


                                              EP IL OGUE   //    245
relatives and classmates in their Chicago suburban commu-
nity. This was an unintended consequence that, in retrospect,
he wished he had avoided.
  Remember that credit travels down in an organization,
while responsibility travels up. Resist the temptation to talk
about yourself and what you accomplished. Talk about all the
people who came together to make this possible and a suc-
cess. In the event of failure, take ownership and move on.
  Your success is a given. Your role is understood and
assumed. You will actually build a much better reputation by
being humble. This might come as a slight shock to you, but
you are now a superhero to the next generation of entrepre-
neurs who will want to be and act just like you. Show them
your better self. We know you can do it and can’t wait to hear
the story of the right exit for you and the FAIR deal you made.




246   //   E XIT RIGHT
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




FOR MARK ACHLER

Writing this book has been a profoundly humbling experi-
ence—as all acts of creation are, whether it’s a startup com-
pany or writing a book. When I began this journey, I wanted
to share everything I learned about navigating the exit pro-
cess after decades in this business with the next generation
of entrepreneurs. What I did not anticipate was how much
I would learn from all of the amazing founders, corporate
development professionals, bankers, and lawyers who so gra-
ciously gave their time, support, and encouragement to this
effort. To have the support of all of these outstanding leaders
and operators, who also thought this book was important
and needed to be written, has been a highlight of my career.
So, I have a lot of people to thank.
  This book needed to be written, and it would not have
been possible without my daughter Emily Achler. Emily is
an outstanding writer and editor, and she is an entrepre-
neur herself. She has been part of the Exit Right book from
the very beginning; as a project manager, research assistant,
writer and editor. Her insights as a reader and early-stage
entrepreneur were critical in shaping the material, and her
project management skills kept the book moving forward.
Speaking as a father, there is no greater joy than working
collaboratively with your daughter and being able to witness
(and beam with pride at) everything she is capable of.
   I am truly blessed in life with a wonderful family; my wife
of nearly forty years, Marcie, and my two other daughters,
Sarah and Haley. Our family is and has always been the main
source of inspiration and motivation in my life.
  A deep and profound thank you to the entire MATH
Venture Partners team for your patience and support. You
contributed to interviews, shared your stories, helped con-
nect us to folks in your network, and supported Mert and me
in the long process of researching and writing. Troy Henikoff,
Dana Wright, Kristie Domzalski, Neal Sáles-Griffin, Elisa
Sepulveda, and my old friend David Semmel. Thank you. I’m
proud every day to have you as my colleagues.


248   //   E XIT RIGHT
  We interviewed dozens of experts who contributed to the
writing of this book. Some of the people we interviewed were
old friends whose advice and counsel I often seek: Samir Sirazi,
Scott Wald, Gregg Kaplan, Herb Fockler, and Troy Henikoff —
you guys are mensches. Thank you for your friendship and
advice. Rishad Tobaccowala is one of the smartest people I
know. Period. He is an amazing writer and synthesizer of
complex topics. He was one of my first stops when we began
writing, and his advice and support have been invaluable.
  The founders and operators who spoke with us about
their lessons learned are the heroes of this book: Alex
White, Rebecca Sholiton, Jennifer Saxton, Andee Harris, Jay
Hoffman, Anne Bonaparte, Patrick Sullivan, Mike Shannon,
Andrew Gadzecki, and Collin Wallace. You are amazing lead-
ers who exemplify the courage it takes to get into the arena.
In contributing to this book, you also exemplify the “give
first” mentality that has personally guided me throughout
my career and that I hope to instill in future leaders.
  The Techstars network, including Brad Feld, Amos
Schwartzfarb, and Jason Seats, have supported this book in
numerous ways. With guys like you at the helm, the Techstars
network continues to get bigger and better. We hope this
book continues to add value and compliments your tremen-
dous work in Venture Deals and Levers.
  Brad Nevin shone a light on the perspective of a board
member going through a transaction. Stan Christensen


                                  A C K NOW LEDGMEN T S   //   249
gave us a look at how investment bankers see the world.
And Rob Marcus, former CEO of Time Warner Cable, gener-
ously took several meetings with us to share stories of bat-
tles lost and won.
  Cliff Shaw and Don Loeb both contributed a ton of exper-
tise to the book. Their insights formed the foundation of sev-
eral chapters. Both were indispensable to this effort.
  To Larry Chu, Co-chair of Global Tech M&A at Goodwin,
we owe a debt of gratitude. The legal questions and ramifica-
tions that are a part of the exit process are so crucial and yet
so unfamiliar for most. Thank you for your help decoding the
mystery in the service of helping more entrepreneurs suc-
cessfully navigate these choppy waters.
   One of the main lessons of this book is the importance of
empathy and relationship building in business transactions.
We want founders to understand the corporate development
mindset within the acquiring company, and we want cor-
porate development professionals to similarly understand
where founders are coming from. We set out to lift up the
curtain on the previously hidden world of corporate devel-
opment, and we are just thrilled with the results. A huge
thank you to our new friends at Pinterest, Twitch, Snowflake,
Atlassian, Facebook, PayPal, and Google who helped us paint
the full M&A picture: Gary Johnson, Hilary Shirazi, Sarah
Hughes, Chris Hecht, Dave Sobota, Peter Sandborn, Maneet
Singh, Austin Johnson, and Stefan Williams.


250   //   E XIT RIGHT
   As first-time authors, we entered into a world of the
unknown. Thank you to Scribe Media, JeVon McCormick,
Maggie Rains, Kacy Wren, and all of the editors and proof-
readers at Scribe. We thank you. And entrepreneurs every-
where thank you.
   I want to say a few things about my partner on Exit Right,
Mert Hilmi Iseri. I first met Mert when he was a brand new
entrepreneur just out of college, ready to take on the world.
Today, Mert is more battle-tested—but his zeal for life, for
pushing the boundaries, and creating new possibilities is still
burning bright. Founders dream of what’s possible, and then
they go out and do it. They have these “crazy” ideas—like, say,
writing a book(!) that they just don’t drop. As Mert would
say, our collaboration and partnership has been one of “game
recognizing game.” It’s been an honor and a privilege, sir. I
can’t wait to see what comes next.
   And finally, I want to call out my father, Howard Achler,
who is no longer with us in person but is always with me in
spirit. He was a brilliant engineer, tinkerer, and computer
buff who instilled in me a passion for technology, eternal
curiosity, and boundless optimism for the future.


FOR MERT ISERI

This is the first book of a series on lessons learned in my prac-
tice as a founder.


                                   A C K NOW LEDGMEN T S   //   251
  Entrepreneurship is a craft. It’s a scientific endeavor, chal-
lenged by limited datasets of personal experiences and costly
mistakes. The ones that make the distance in this journey
are the ones who treat their process of “trial and error” with
an eye towards long-term mastery. I have dedicated my life
to this humbling journey. The publishing of Exit Right signi-
fies a moment of transition, leaving SwipeSense to start my
next chapter.
  This book is my first attempt to share what I wish I had as
an entrepreneur with other founders. And it has been writ-
ten with the generosity of many others that left their mark
on me.
  Firstly, I want to acknowledge my co-founders Yuri Malina
and Jori Hardman, who, through thick and thin, shared this
adventure with me. They kept pushing me and each other to
be better, and I’m eternally grateful for their partnership. In
my heart, I know that we will be climbing many mountains
in the future together.
  Second, I’m grateful for all of the founders, bankers, law-
yers, and M&A executives who have generously shared their
wisdom with us in making this book happen. After going
through my own exit, I knew there were huge gaps in my
perspective. Dozens of experts shared their hard-earned les-
sons with us. Their advice will live on to hopefully help thou-
sands of founders who are facing the difficult task of selling
their companies. I want to call out Brad Feld for generously


252   //   E XIT RIGHT
agreeing to write a foreword and Larry Chu for his priceless
advice during the writing process.
  Third, I want to thank Emily Achler. Our editor, project
manager, and thought partner who brought this book to
life. Writing a book is a stressful experience, and you made it
enjoyable for all of us.
   Finally, I want to call out my mentor, co-author, and dear
friend, Mark Achler. You have given me a north star to strive
towards with my life. You’ve shown me that ambition can
coexist with kindness and that when the dust settles, there is
nothing more important than family. I hope this book made
you proud, looking forward to writing many more together
with you.




                                  A C K NOW LEDGMEN T S   //   253
ENDNOTES




1 Zappos.com, “Jewelry | Zappos True Customer Story,”
  YouTube video, November 5, 2017, https://www.youtube.com/
  watch?v=pfC4NFzbQ2k.
2 “Sony-Columbia Pictures: Lessons from a Cross Border
  Acquisition,” IBS Center for Management Research, accessed
  August 9, 2021, https://www.icmrindia.org/casestudies/
  catalogue/Business strategy2/Sony-Columbia Pictures Cross
  Border Acquisition.htm.
3 “Hart-Scott-Rodino Act Thresholds Decrease for 2021,”
  Cooley, February 1, 2021, https://www.cooley.com/news/
  insight/2021/2021-02-01-hart-scott-rodino-act-thresholds-
  decrease-2021.
4 Sarah Friar, No Filter: The Inside Story of Instagram (New York:
  Simon & Schuster, 2020).
5 We want to give special thanks to the Co-Chair of the Global
  Tech M&A Practice at Goodwin Procter Law, Larry Chu. As
  a partner with over $150 billion in transactions under his
   belt, he generously provided his wisdom in the making of
   this chapter. He is also an active investor, and we highly
   recommend working with someone extraordinary like him on
   your startup.
6 Brad Feld and Jason Mendelsohn, Venture Deals: Be Smarter
   than Your Lawyer and Venture Capitalist, 3rd ed. (Hoboken, NJ:
   Wiley, 2016).
7 Chris Hecht, “The Atlassian Term Sheet,” Atlassian, December
   16, 2019, https://editorial.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/ED/
   pages/262284/The+Atlassian+Term+Sheet.
8 Annie Duke, Thinking in Bets: Making Smarter Decisions When
   You Don’t Have All the Facts (New York: Portfolio/Penguin,
   2018).
9 James P. Carse, Finite and Infinite Games: A Vision of Life as Play
   and Possibility (New York: Free Press, 1986).
10 Brad Feld and Amy Batchelor, Startup Life: Surviving and
   Thriving in a Relationship with an Entrepreneur (Hoboken, NJ:
   Wiley, 2013).




256   //   E XIT RIGHT
